O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is behind the science of medicine, having accomplished it, through his explanations and by his declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it was given to me in vision that I would complete this treatise with this work, which is part of the book of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the book of hands is distorted in our region and is strange throughout, so that it is lost knowledge and forgotten, and there remains from them only a few small descriptions in books of the ancients who had moved their hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this arose errors and vanities, and the intentions were closed, and the knowledge was withdrawn.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I can revive her by observing the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abridgment;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And I will assemble the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation for them, just as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is fitting for one who enters into this that to surpass in anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the joint of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and marrow and the number of joints, and the departure and movement of the veins, and their rest, and so that he know the source from which they issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And because Hippocrates said that the knife with the blunt edge is much better, and with the work it's poor;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and in the art of hand itself.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	Let us say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not aware of what has been said, will be careful to avoid making an error and not offend others;
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	After that I've had to endure many more of those who contradict this knowledge, and abandon it in favor of their own ignorance and foolishness.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	But I saw a madman who cut the apostoem of scrofuls or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries at the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	and for this reason, so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another madman who treated a stone from an old man's foot, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	so he took out a piece of the bladder with it, and died within three days of his illness.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have seen that this is called for the treatment, and I see the state of the patient and the size of the wound, and I know well whether the patient will die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another madman who took in the treatment of a duke of our land who had broken his leg, and with the breakage got wounds;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the mismanaged plain of ignorance holds back the breach on the wound with great force, and does not allow it to heal at all, and leaves it so that I will finish.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and instruct him not to touch it again;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and held back so that the leg was completely exposed and the feet came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I am summoned to come to him, but I delayed coming to release the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I saw it dislocated he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the corruption had already been confirmed in that limb, and it could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And do not stop the corruption of the limb until all the limbs have perished.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there are other signs that can cause an abscess to form and then inflame, due to the malice of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humors, does not suit to touch it with iron unless there is some relief so that one can remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	which is to say, how it has perils in various conditions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each one of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	So that you will keep it safe, so that the foolish might not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your arms in consideration, and undertake your patients lightly but firmly, and use the best way, so that through God's grace you come to safety and are praised;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	Let loose the fearful diseases of the body's health.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And take back your arms from that which makes you doubt, and hold fast in them so that you may come to this world from the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	The Galen's writings say in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Don't take treatment for a bad disease unless you are called mad.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are of fire cautery and of cauterization with aqua medicina, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of forms of discharges, and of cauterization instruments, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and are the chapters arranged and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisting, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is arranged with the size of each instrument just as with pieces, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Also that we remember the work, it is fitting to say which quality of aid and how much pain each condition causes.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of help and of harm are the longest word and subtle science and the secrets of response.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and this is what many wise men spoke about, and agreed upon;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and let them spare him from my words, for I have a great longing.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cauterization helps universally with all kinds of matter, whether it is flesh or skin.
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	that I mean, hot complexion by matter and dry complexion by matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry mixture of matter, some have investigated and said that cauterization is great aid.
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cauterization is of no help to disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat when it is from dryness, nor from cold.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and it is said by those who speak against cautery that it provides great aid to diseases hot and dry, which come into the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you buy the body of a man and its moisture is in the condition of fire, you find the body frozen.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And all veins, do not enter fire except for those who have tested it, and who know by long use of the cautery scalpel, and the diversity of human complexion, and the disposition and the causes of their diseases, and remedies, and the space required for each.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	For other complexion types we have little fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians agree with it.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that cutting is a fire composed of cures, and has greater benefit than burning with hot medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire cautery, it is simple, and does not come from fire to other limbs except when applied to the limb that is burned, and does no harm to another limb if its name is known.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Medicines that come from one part of the body to another by separating, and bring illness and pain to the healthy parts.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And in case it stops the sick person.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire does not do this for its height and for the gentleness of its substance; if it has a surplus.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found by experimentation and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and this is in the words of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And for this reason I excuse the length of my words, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is revealed by fire, and the quality of the work, as to how it cures diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says in demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Or (it) is received in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree on when the cauteries should be made, and take oaths.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cauterization is effective in all times, because the enduring evils are overcome by the aid of cauterization;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and himself, when the cautery is done, for necessary pains and suffering that cannot wait until greater harm comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not think at all, dear boy, if how a foolish man falls.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	because the disease which is cured by cautery has no return.
et il le dient ensi;	and he says so;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it's not so as they think, because cautery is not just a medicine that moves the complexion, and dries out the humors which are the cause of pain, but it's valued less than medicine for its haste, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And another thing is that disease may arise at any time according to the complexion of the sick person and the nature of the disease and its virtue.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And the superfluities are assembled in him through the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless you administer cauterization to him when he has little superfluity and moisture, just as cauteries for dens for pain, and similar things, because no more pain returns.
mais ce avient poc.	But this happens little by little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many do not understand why cauterization is called the "back" of medicine, because it's seen.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	But they do not believe that cauterization is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cauterization the "back" of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in no disease and they are useless, then we must administer to them the cauterization, and it is valuable.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	And then open the fire cautery carefully, because it is on the back of medicine, not contrary to the understanding of the mad doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancient people said that cautery with an instrument of gold is more effective than one made of iron, and they did not say that fires were used only for the quality of gold and because of its high substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	And they said that the wounds from cautery do not cause decay, but it is not truly so because I have proven it, and have found that it happens in some people;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Cautery with gold is more valuable than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And you do not know when you heat an instrument of gold, whether it has cooled down because of the color of the gold, and if so.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if you heat it too much;
si font au feu;	If they prick at their base;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus it is a sufficient hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cautery which we have tried many times on our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or we have ordered this chapter of the lower limbs to be written first because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	for the olive oil cautery.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and in it there are two remedies: one made because of a disease called 'soda', and another because of many humors that come out from the head to the eyes, ears, and nose, and for many headaches and pain in the teeth and throat, and likewise for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicinal solution to cleanse and clarify the head or three parts, as each virtue and medicine and the custom of the sick can endure.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then put back the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make him sit, cross one leg over the other with your hands, and put his hands on either side of him.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	Then place the root of your palm above the root of his nose between his two eyes.
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and where your two fingers meet, if it bleeds then exhale the cautery called "olive", because of this it is.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And put the signet of the seal on the left shoulder; and do this by descending and extracting your hand a little at a time while turning it around.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then lift your hand insensibly, and reward the left shoulder if you see a small bone.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you do not see it, then repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After taking a little rest, and applying a poultice made of wool and moist cotton within, put it on the shoulder, and let it be for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After putting a wet cloth in butter on top.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and let it be until the scab is fallen off.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After a treatment for the wound of the tendon, which is called "tetrafarmacoñ", so long as it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients say that when the wound remains open for a longer time, it becomes purged.
et por ce si aide mues.	and therefore use ointments.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that one must cut the cautery so much that a part of the bone is burned, and then replace what was burned with the bone, and then be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And the others say that one should cut the wound so much the longer it is exposed, and pound it so hard as you press down on the bone just as wide as a spindle used by women for sewing because this causes the humors to come out loose.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must expose the wound for a longer time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	After that, one must cure and soothe.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two kinds of cauterizations do not seem to me to be good for everything, fire that in some men has a voice of fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and I think I should leave it.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the joints are weakened by continuous exposure to natural remedies, as we have seen in other parts of the body.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and myself consider that the joints of a patient are weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salutary and healing for me, therefore I make use of this method accordingly.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When in all the head comes chronic pain that lasts for a long time, then the patient must use the "cough" medicine and pills called so, and purgatives of the head, ointments, and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if you make the fire cautery as we have previously described, and it is worthless.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Be careful that if the head of the sick person is of great strength and not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	and therefore apply the cautery below that which we have previously described above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After making the fire cautery on each corner of the head just above the bone, as we have previously described, and make the cautery on the part called "vassez";
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and it is this where one puts vases;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and hold your hand so that you do not see the bone;
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is fitting that the fire cauterys of the horns are more subtle than those of the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When in the middle of the head there is sudden pain and the illness is extended up to the joint, and the joints are purged with medicines made from onions, and other treatments have been done as I have said in the division of diseases, and none of these things help.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	and therefore the fire cautery is done in two ways, that is to say with sharp medicine and with heat.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cautery with sharp medicine is that you prick with a small needle and remove the skin and then expose two joints, and then make an incision on the temple where the pain holds in this manner so that you can replace the small needle underneath the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it is reset, if the limb and its joint are properly set and left for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then loosen the limb and apply fire to the wound, leaving it so for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then put a cloth soaked in butter over the wound so that the infection may cease.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After treatment with ointment until it is healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see so, do as I have written or ordered for treating the purging medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cauterization is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Burn the cauterization of how it is the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "clous" because the head is made in the shape of a nail or has little meat and some gore, and has a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and put on the patient’s shoulder a bandage of pain, and hold your hand and cut off slightly the fever that has come, until the moisture of the spice is dry.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and lift your hand so that the arteries are not scorched, which is beforehand, and there is abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After placing cotton in the wound area, and putting on a bandage on the patient for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then place wet cotton in butter, and then treat the patient with ointment until he is cured.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery called "cultellare", at the tip, and keep the artery covered in this headache which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the head or skull (emigraine in Old French refers to a severe headache)
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you cure an migraine as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and do not take advantage, and see that those who had cautery before told about medicine and iron, did not suffer from it, then it is reasonable to scald the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And so mark on the bone a line with half an inch of length, and put your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that it does not become just above the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and beware of the mandible that mutes when you jaw, and do not let the nerve have sight except for the mute and that spasms do not come to the sick, and be careful of the corruption of the artery when it is cut, or if cutting causes great fear and itself to that who does not know it, and who has not studied and experienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the work remain in its proper place;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when an artery is struck, and I will show you to them in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that the cautery does not suffocate at the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or the chapter of extracting the artery, with the cauterization that has two wounds.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cauterization is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of ear pain from cold weather
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When ear pain comes from cold, and we have used soluble medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not cease, then apply this cautery which is called "poins", because it has this form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After pricking all around the sick ear, or on both sides where the pain holds, and you move a little distance towards the root of the ear then mark it with a pin.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	And tie X points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment, let it be so that he is sound.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not done except for those that are caused by inflammation, as we have said in the division of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not perform cauterization on appearances that come from drying and phlegm of old men.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this appearance of torture that is caused by inflammation of the head and neck and gargareism, and that one is not worth it, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauters:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one in the root of the ear, and another a little before the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and put the cautery on the part that opens up clean, and they make a cautery directly on the ear above one pore of the forehead and another on the temple as long as an inch.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery there until the moisture of the wound is dried.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is the resemblance of the knife that we have placed in front, but it is a bit more subtle and they should be the larger knives.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment let him be as I have said, until he is clean.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, but if he does not benefit, and the patients do not have fever, then they make four cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	On the second joints of the head, and one in the neck, and that which is called "vassels" as we have previously said, and the cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and treat it as we have instructed before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	And to this sickness, it is fitting to give the patient large and flat pills for the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	after taking the head of the patient, and placing the plaster of sainfoin on the occipital region, which is written in treating plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the way of the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is so, good is;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if it is not, do III cuts of emollient on the head when you go down to the neck, and give a space between each cut two inches.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and the treatment as for the others, and if you see a jointer (arrow) in the patient's body, then give one cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if necessary, two cuts on the other two horns, and treat until he is healthy.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and be the cauteries which are called "olive oil" as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head.
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is fitting that the head be purified with years and what we have previously stated;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After the examination of the patient, then apply fire cautery to the head and on each corner, and later and thirdly above the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	And if you need more, and the body is moist, and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease is severe, then apply four fire cauteries above the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let him wait until the wound is dry, and lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the treatment until he is cured, and apply the "olivare" which we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	of an epilempsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epilempsy doctors should use fire cautery only on those who are flaccid, and it is first necessary to soften the brain by years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, when the patient has great pain and suffers from a harsh remedy.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, apply gargling and mastication with the brain-stimulating bone marrow often with raw meat;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king's head has been cut off and it is placed in a basin, and we do the fire cautery as we have told before, and do the fire cautery on the neck, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is strong and suffers, let him do the fire cautery as I have told to one who has paralysis and softening of flesh, on the spine at the back and neck, and let him do the olive cautery according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is sick, then they must do fire cautery with subtlety according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excessive flow or corrupted moisture and a large fever, then cut off the cauterized parts as we have said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluities decline into melancholy and the body of the sick person is moist, then let them drink something because their cerebrum may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the king's head on the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	After make a linen band well made, like a circle, if you put it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and bind them so that they do not cross, and keep them well tied from all parts.
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After presenting the bandage, take some melted butter of an old sheep.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and let the heated wood be tempered so that it is not too hot to pour into.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after emptying the circle from within the head, and let it cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and make this treatment for the patient each week once with another good governance until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see someone being cauterized while making many pinches all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This manner of cautery is more beneficial to the brain.
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put on a moistened cotton cloth in butter and fatty pig's flesh.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eye
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye comes first through division as I have said, then begin and give the patient a medicinal drink, cleansing the head, and warding off all moisture, and let him sweat or take a bath several times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After he commands him to reapply the bandage, and then make cautery around the head, and make a second cautery on the two temples since there is no aversion in both ears together, or if one has an aversion in one;
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And treat with all the fire cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and apply the cautery long according to the size of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And beware of infection, and if you see a lot of blood coming out, if it is stained with poor quality as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incising how to do it carefully.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and there is no case where a cautery or hatereil is applied under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the eyes' shape
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the eyelids are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or on the arteries that appear in front of the chin.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	And we see that this is due to superfluities of cold and moist humors, therefore the fire cautery which I mentioned at the beginning must be done in descending from the eyelids:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	The cautery is applied to the head, and it is cauterized on both the two temples, and on the two bones below.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if it has more sores, then the cautery is made sharp above the eyelid at all small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the flesh by within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	As you take the medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give three bad poisons to the sick man.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After cutting off the head, and doing cauterization on the middle of the olive-shaped cautery;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and do the second cautery on the cautery which is called "clavilis" above the two shoulders, a little below.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and watch that the artery you don't cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of oil is softened by sickness and moisture, then make the cautery which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	This part of the body
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see, do the second cautery on the two shoulders as long as the shoulder is.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave my hand except until the third part of the paper is burnt, as I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	one hair that sticks out
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	There is never a case where the hairs of the ointment are converted to pigments, and prick at the ointment, and do a cautery as in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	Instruct the patient to let his hair grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in your own way;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After putting his eyes on a piece of paper like the shape of the fuel of myrrh, and like the beginning of the sign of the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then I put cotton soaked in oil and myrrh from Persile on the wound, then take the cautery of that form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After drawing on the figure a little at a time, and gradually a bit more times, so that the wound is sealed to its place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of health of the work are that you see the paper drawn back, and the hairs raised at the tip of the nail.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and therefore lift your hand, and let it remain for three days, then put cotton soaked in fat until the swelling is gone.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of ointment until he is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if the hairs come back, and the paper is softened then reapply the cautery to the same place, just as you did first.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are lost, then cautery until the paper is raised to its natural place, and even, and do not prick at the hair with the nail.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The cautery of the medicines burning is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment of the form of the leaf of myrtle;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and live charcoal, one of each.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And make it fast, if it does not cool, then cover with the form you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and place on paper eyes;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the illness holds only in the oil, then it must be applied with both.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and soak the cotton cloth in oil.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And the patient's joint should be put in its own place and your dough showing on the medicine, press it for a little every time the patient feels numbness of the medicine, as he feels numbness like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, so hold tight to your health.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	When the morsication is not passed, so lift the leg up and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If it is not so, then put again the medicine on the leg or if the medicine has not worked, until your works are even and your eyes be set straight.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on moist cotton in butter until the wounds are closed, after dressing the leg that is called "dyaflenis" and other things, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to guard your work with great care, so that the wound does not come loose from its place.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes moist after, and the hair pricks in the oil, then resume the medicine on that leg which has been moistened by its own paper, just as you have done before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment until they are healthy.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the poultice of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to these differences your constraints.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and do not be answered the straight path with him who has knowledge of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of a fistula by fire cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you cure a fistula just as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures are not beneficial, then it is necessary that you make it cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in a clean cloth;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	And bind the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or twitch.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	After putting a damp cloth on the head in olive oil or apple juice.
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After the fire cautery which is thus:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is cut into the cheek so that it resembles the shape of a feather quill, assembled so that the cautery;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	so that if you see it, is cut from one cheek to the other, and so it resembles a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but this one is not cut worthily for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the abscess it splits open, and pulling out the pus, and drying;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it opens again, then cut the vein.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	After putting on the hot cautery in the shape of a cone, and holding your hand to the cautery at the part of no navel, lest your hands make madness;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	And put the cautery in the grease of oil, and it will corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery procedure just before the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If this does not work, repeat the cautery once more, and if you still need to do it, then leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After this, put it on moist cotton wool in butter, and apply the cure of the antiseptic ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without being cured, then apply a medicine that is acid and corrosive until the bones are uncovered;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and he should follow what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cautery for fistulas that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Treat an abscess and drain the vein;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After, put in the wound a camphor powder of fine quality because this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and they put to the amount of a three-year-old child.
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and tie your hand firmly, so that the patient's limb does not move at all, unless the blood flows and flows.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is fitting to put some cotton soaked in wine or oil on the wound.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the blood, if it is free from fistula, heals by marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	But if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not the case, then it is necessary to administer purgatives to the belly, and bring the fistula back into the body as much as seems proper to him in his own house.
des crevaices en levres	of fissures in the lips.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often cavities occur in lips called "poil", and even more often in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cavities of those which we have mentioned in the division, and if the cure does not profit, then apply a small cautery surgical instrument according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	and puts it immediately in those crevices until it comes out from the same place.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after a cure with cerote, so that it may be healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after being softened and putrid and becoming a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	And you cure him just as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Therefore it is necessary that you cut the cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After the bandage or perforation of the fistula, hold your hand until the iron stays in its place, and pull it out from there;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this again once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until he is healthy.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if he is cured thus, that's good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if this is not so, it's necessary to discover the wound and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	any movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the patient on a clean surface.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After taking the cautery, which will take shape afterwards in this way, that you put a chain on the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put the cautery hot in that spot, tightly, and keep your hand there so the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After lifting your hand and resume the cautery according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After filling the patient's mouth with a salt solution, and then let him lie on his side for an hour and rich fires.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in that manner the teeth that were moving are compressed again, and the gums are restrained, and the moisture is corrupted and dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When pain of teeth comes from coldness, or there is coldness in the eye, and the medicines have no value, then it is necessary to do cautery according to two methods:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cauterizing with butter and cauterizing with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cauterizing with butter if it is done so that you press butter from a vein, and the end in a iron or iron rod;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	after pressing cotton and covering it with a cloth over the tip of a tent, and letting the ulcer in butter boil, and applying it to the painful tooth tightly, until it cools;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and so do frequently until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and when you see that there is pus cotton and wool in butter burnt, and apply it to the painful tooth, and put on hot iron so that the fire reaches the top of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	Inassemble the fire cautery so it is made like this that you grasp with one iron chain or twine, and make it thick so that the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After the fire is applied to the cautery, it will change shape after a while, and then place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do it often, for the pain will be felt on the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	It is fitting that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of applying this cautery, and then takes it out afterwards.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and that is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery on your head whatever you want, and according to the power that you have.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	And this is the form of the knife:
des scrophules	dead sores
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrophules (boils) are caused by humidity and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicine, then use the fire cautery on the hair of which this comes after, and have two openings for the humors to come out from the other side.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and apply the fire cautery on the abscess once or twice, until it comes to a head of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, apply the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be thus for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and put a moistened cloth in butter on top of the wound until it is healed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After a cure, let the limb rest from pains and discomfort until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the ring
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture overpowers the veins of the arm and similarly when it comes from a cold temperament, then it is fitting that the sick person be relieved first with medicinal solutions.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After performing fire cautery at the root of the neck, and being careful not to come too close to the throat, and not burn the wound but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After performing the second fire cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and applying the cautery which is called "clavicle" because we have the shape in front.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heal the limb as we have said, until it is healed.
de la toust	of the throat.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and illness of the bone are from moist colds, and the patient has no fever nor sweat, and is the sickness old, then you must II cauters on the knuckle in his joints;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery to the bone between the two kneecaps;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let these be called "clavicle" according to the form that is said in front.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, do cauter by pricking at the entire cauterized area that is called "pins" because of its form in the sickness of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and the pins are exactly thirty or more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment as previously said, and be the cauterys at three joints according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because they are easier to cut, because you do three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder joint
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Then stand the patient on his back and his side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	After the knife is removed from the twitching, it is necessary to take it out with your left hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated within it, then cut the cautery with two needles in this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the wound so that it pierces just this side, and the figure of the cautery comes together with four cauteries;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery that has three needles, because the figures of the cauterization are so four cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three needles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes they press on this nerve because it has eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After placing the cautery on the flesh with thread;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After resting the patient, do not keep the limbs still for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if the dislocation occurs above, then the case is poor, so make cauterization on the thick part with a cauterized needle or many cauterizations in a point.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed, and the moist part is healed, and the patient's sickness is alleviated.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When colds and many moistors come to the stomach, and they extract them from his complexion, and multiply the catharres in him, and do all sorts of accustomed cures which he does not benefit from, then it is fitting that the sick person be laid on their back, and stretch out their legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	After that, you will perform the third cautery I under the earlobe with a spoon, of the amount of two, all over the cautery nail, and the second cautery on both sides so that the cautery figures are at three angles, and there is the same space between one and another as they will be joined together when they rot.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and when the cautery is applied in such a way that it inflames the two parts of the heart, and the figures of the cauteries are in this form next to each other:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see a large cautery being applied inside the stomach in this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	And he who fears this cautery should be cauterized by pricking and pointing to the stomach at the same time as its quantity is seen.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and then let him undergo the whole cautery, which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the treatment we had previously, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	when the liver comes with pain from frost and moisture and great ventosity, to the point that it is forced out of its natural state through superfluities;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patients are cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does them no good, unless they are covered over with their own bile.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and a third point according to this form and shape and quantity on the liver, excluding the ypocondriac region, where the cost of the spleen comes.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	And let there be space between each cautery the size of a doe;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauteries be long from head to body, and do not press too hard on your hand throughout the cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and let only the moist places be burned, and let the patient stand upright on his feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, then let him sit, and stretch out his legs, and raise his arms;
et c’est li forme:	And this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you have your wish, then cauterize these cauteries on the cutellarie, being subtle and wise in this art, and beware lest you burn too much skin, for you will dry out the entire body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and let him not come to boil, for the cuts are very subtle at that place, and one must know how to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you see whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the net.
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the flesh, he feels the patient great pain but not very severe.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the net, he feels great pain extremely.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment needs to take the fever down, it is advisable that the patient should be shaved above his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then apply the poultice where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles an arrow, because this is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	Instruct to cauterize as long as the keys are hot, until they come forth with pus, so that the infection is completely burned.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment as described, until he is well.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And it is not suitable for this cauterization to be used on anyone except one who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and whose hands have been able to cure these diseases at least once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	So it can be done with great courage, and I must say that it seems to me to be worth leaving.
dou cautere de pleuresin	How to cut the pericardium
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The old ones said to make the cauterization of the spleen with the roots of the aristolchic herb, in this way:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long root of aristolchic herb, as large as you can find, and make it dry, just as large and as long as your two fingers.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and the mold in oil, and grasp it with fire, and cauterize between the flesh and the neck, and two points are cauterized a little in descending to the area that is under the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and two cauterize between the fifth rib and the sixth, at an angle a little after;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	one cauterize between the belly and the pubic bone, and one above the stomach, and two between the shoulders, and between the two ribs where the cauterization is between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press my hand, but rather make an aperture so as to smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And an old man said that no one uses the fire cautery similar to this razor, and they put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and let him burn with fire, as we have said in the passage of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear for the sick now, or a fistula appears that cannot be cured.
de la mice	of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the sickness of the mouse, as we have said about divisions of cures, and it does not profit, then they say there are three ways of cauterization that all are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	From which some say that you should do three cauterizations, or four, binding as the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cautery that we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not hurry your hand with the cautery, and let the patient sit on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another manner of cautery is that you should heat the cautery to two points, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the wound that is directed to the mouse, or when the cut on the malady comes towards the left side, and let the elevations be lifted according to the wound, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After they have applied the second ointment, you should burn the fire cautery until it is perceived by the other side, and then take out the fire, and so in this manner there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	But if you see, if all the cautery has burned with two ointments.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the wound has gotten putrid due to long time, and this is an excuse that the other treatments before mentioned.
de ydropisie	From dropsy, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery does not apply to dropsy, except when done in the way called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure according to the manners we have told in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries inside the wound, and one on the stomach, one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one towards the belly.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauteries be very close to the spine of the cut.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After let the cautery to close for a long time, and do not leave the patient's cure after the cautery;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing would come quickly, and both wounds will unite with God's aid.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	the form of the cautery for the abdomen is as we have shown before;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and that for the back should be olive oil, according to what it is put there previously.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the bones
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropical and filled with a yellow pus, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and lift your hand with the cautery as it turns.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, for so would the fire burn the citrine, and thus the cautery should be done in this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After do this, make two cauterizations on each foot at the tip of the cutlass.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And so let the fire cautery be performed on the long one, with one below the knee in front and the other behind it, on the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and let the cautery be left open for a long time to cure what is inside;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the illness
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a stomach ailment comes from cold and moisture, such that the virtues retained and digestives which are in the stomach and intestines are thrown off, and cannot be cured with any other treatments;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great virtue, so do on him the cautery of the stomach as he has spoken about it before or the stomach cautery which we have mentioned before, the cautery that circles;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And the fourth cautery is performed on the subtle veins under all cauteries with a needle very fine, and two cauteries are done above the haunches.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see moistures abundant and the patient suffering, then make fire cautery on the navel, and fire cautery on each joint, and twice make fire cautery on the stomach near the great one, because the cure is beneficial when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are located at the base, or one, and more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are treated as we have said in sections, but it does not benefit, perform cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	Three above the spine on the back, those who are behind the almeda to and fro in a triangular manner, and one cautery below the vein two.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and it swells in the face, then give one cautery on the stomach, as has been said, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen with all fine needles.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the fire cautery remain for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment the limb must be allowed to recover.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	from the fat which is called "thelel
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut with the knife, if it seems to be frozen like a scythe, and then sets everything on fire that was cut.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let it rest as long as the cautery comes to life at the opening of the vein, so that there is no wound.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much of the cut, cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after applying ointments for a profit as long as they are healing.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a great fire on the affected area, it will have more aid.
de plaie mal curee	of badly treated wounds
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure torture or opening, we will tell him in his own words, if he comes to this illness that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is an ulcer, and it is old and covered with putrid pus and corrupted moisture, if you press to see whether the entire wound is tender, observe that you know how deep the wound is.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After the cauterization which seems like a razor, and pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that is entered, and resume the cauterization until the flesh burns and corrupts once or twice, or three times, according to how much there is need.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and guard the strong nerves that are strained, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and intestines, guard them well, and do not perform this fire on them unless they are in a walnut shell, and think they are not human.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after treating the patient until they are healthy, and if the humors are imbalanced, and the materials are long-lying, then you should know that the patient is entirely healthy.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the materials are not bones, know that the lead is heavy, and corrupts the bone.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and so as one of these which we will speak of in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from a blow comes with great swelling and does not take effect in a woman, then it is fitting that you apply cautery on the swollen parts of one side and the other, as we have said about the cautery claw.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if our cauteries touch an artery, then have three more cauteries in a line, and they will give greater aid.
de la vessie	From the vessel
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is mole and weak from blows and moisture, if the patient retains urine, then make cautery in the part behind the bladder, where the hair of the nipple begins, on both the right and left side, each one making cauteries as long as they can with one stroke.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and he makes fire cautery on his back, or if he needs to do it there.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the fire cautery be cut like that.
de la marris	From the intestines
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not conceive again, and the flesh is corrupted and its ends are late.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, it causes great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	therefore it is fitting that one makes fire cautery around the mouth, as we have said, and fire cautery on his back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let him make fire cautery of the shoulder, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the shoulder
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the swollen viscous substances flow from the boil of the gallbladder, and because of this he moves out of his place, and the signs are that the knee is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and when it is found that the joints are separated by this movement, so it is fitting to cauterize the patient over the thorn of the groin, in a cautery similar to a circle, and signifying before the joint as it turns, so that the thorn may be inside the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if the cauterizations are like those of the stomach that one has cauterized.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cauterization is not present, make three cauterizations of the olive tree oil, and apply them as thick as all the scars.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the patient until he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the groin
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the groin of the groin, and it is caused by cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated with what we have said in the section on division, but the treatment does not work, and the disease is old.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then it is necessary to purge the patient of great humors of old pills or other hard pills that resemble them.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After cutting (the hair)
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of cautery is according to two ways:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	which are to be assembled with medicines hot, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which some are such that:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the flesh of the cheek three fire cauteries according to this shape, and make a strong and deep wound, and put between each cautery the space equal to the thickness of two doves, so that the cauteries are olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Never is cautery performed in the middle of the cheek bone because there are four corresponding wounds according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, when the cut is made by the cautery of a circle as we have described in the dislocation of the cheek bone;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but make it in such a way that the circle contains all of the cheek bone, and all the thick parts of the wound are seared.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatique, when the pain holds in the gout, and does not come to just below the knee or just below the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes just to the thigh and knee, then make two cauteries there, where the patient says that the pain lies, and four cauteries above the ankle, to the left side by one thumb.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cauteries be made with a cutting instrument, and sear the thick parts of the wound.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain spreads to two or three feet from the spot where it is felt in the cautery, and he is pricked at the place where the pain is felt for three points or four points, which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it is thus, that he makes more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if it is so that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then he cuts at the cutlery or circular cautery; and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not cauterize too much, lest you burn the nerves and great arteries, and cause more annoyance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen others who had fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and let them burn so that the leg was completely severed, and also the toes, and they became recognized and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a belly solution that killed him.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, perform fire cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men say in the cautery of the hawthorn, for this is the manner: make a cut thus, with a blade one size smaller than a nail, or one point less; and cut alternately between two points, spaced apart like the length of a coin.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and the fingers intertwined of two parts, and are also like those we have, and there is one iron band very well made;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And then it is heated until it is completely red and sends out smell, and then put it on the patient's groin, and turn it over to his healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and after the cautery once is performed, and he lets the patient remain for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make plaster of butter, and let the wound be covered for long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment with binding until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Alboçsim says that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its sting, and few people do so.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and it is good to apply this, which he can endure, and at which place he will suffer.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cautery of medicine burns if you make an instrument between the cheeks, in which it lies on the edge of the mouth, and is made of iron or wood, for a long time, with two hooks, and has two parts, one between each.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	And are joined together and on top, and assemble according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After putting the hawthorn bandage on the patient lying on his side, and press your hand very hard on the hawthorn bandage;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After putting between the two circles of hot wax which is heated in a pot, and letting it sit for one hour with ten, and suffer the patient the heat and the inflammation.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	It is found to have a bite like of fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the mordication has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the heel of a sweet herb, and let it be so for three days, and put on butter until what is black from the ash falls out;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let him sit for three days that fermentation may be extracted;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	And what would be the rear part aid after the treatment of wounds, until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended just to the thigh or just to the leg, make the same instrument that you have made before in a larger way;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the manner of the sweet herb, and I have written it in the treatment of medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicklime and live sulfur, equal amounts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	If there is a small opening, do not open it so that the point of an arrow can enter.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	And put the other pot into a good place, and fill it with plumb, and place ash and chalk on top, and pour honey over them, until there are two powder residues left; thus you will have taken it well in your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And let it remain in that state until the powder comes down ash and cinder or into the pot with plumb, then take all of that, and place it on chalk and ash as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And when it is very hot and has been administered in the manner of overages of medicine and by cauterys of other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it makes all other works like fire, and so also with other medicines; because when you cauterize well the navel as such, honey and acacia and almonds with lye, all these things mingled together make a mixture.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And the Greeks tell us of a cure that one man was cured of the pain of his vein and sciatic nerve, and he spoke highly of it, and said that no other cure is needed, and he became sane for only once when this cure was performed, and he took a bath as he taught later on.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And instruct him in this manner to press with the lard green and fresh and dry, and grind it much with a little fat, and put on the groin and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain lies, and tie;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and let him leave for three hours and by the quantity that the patient feels no more pain.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then put him into the bath so that his body may be slightly loosened, and put him to bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medicines, unless they are after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with horse's tendon, if it does help;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and must be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and anoint it with old oil, and put it on the fossa that is between the little toe and the other one called the foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dried horse's tendon, and applying it to the fire until it is carbonized, then putting it on wool and letting it soak in that.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And redo again thus, and do not cease to do so until you think with your mind that it will come just to the shoulder joint, and that the pain will be ceased;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of cheese".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or by percussion, or by excessive evacuation, or because of swelling of cold matter, none of these things is worth cautery, except for those who come from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	it is fitting that after this, the patient should be void of fetid pills or other similar things; and on his back, in such place as where the pain lies, three signs made of fire, one for each line, and in each line cautery or more according to virtue and quantity that the patient can bear;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and it shall be made the cautery according to the cautery which is called "pains";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make three cauteries or four at the jointed claw cauterizing according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This illness comes many times to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a crooked arm when it starts to move, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	And you will find in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance that comes with the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe how to cure it, cut off the affected area according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If you prick with cauterization each part of the spine increasingly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if you cut into the spine at a point just behind the second vertebra, or the third, and the points are close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the cure, keep the patient until he is healthy as we have said, and be careful not to apply cauterization to areas of swellings or inflammation which are in the grasp of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pain is in joints due to moisture that are spread out in each body member, and when pain comes in the feet, which they call "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold reasons and medicines cannot cure it, even then are cured by cautery in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	make a fire of cautery around the joint in the foot, and use olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is pain where you press on the face of the foot, do cautery to the entire point that we claim.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come to both knees and other joints, and this happens often, for each knee or four of each part, the fire cautery is applied on each joint three times or four on each part, all over the olive treatment.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you have a task of more weight, then do more, but keep your hand warm only until the fat part is frozen.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend just to the groin and the back, instruct the patient to apply the fire cautery that we have discussed in his chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if pains are in the hands, so apply pain into the fold two lines.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there is still no pain after, then apply pain to each joint and to the hair of the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if pains come to both shoulders or both elbows, then apply fire cautery to each part, and do good governance for the patient, and administer remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	But if you make good governance and purge the swelling, he will be made whole by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	From the operation of the scalp
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When rupture comes to flesh, and the swellings descend into wounds and it's new, then it is fitting that while you are treating the wound, do not let it be wounded again.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that they use things that clear the stomach, so that the pus descends from its belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after which you seat him on his back between your hands, and he commands that he tightens his leg as long as the swellings are healing, and you pull it to your hands, and he signs for you to cut over the rupture onto the bone of the elbow, and so make a mark like half of a circle above the body.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then you inflate the cautery with what is its form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until he is white and his senses are clear.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Let them remove the bowels to their place.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and hold the fingers of the hands against which they do not return.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and sew well the knees of the patient, and put a gauze over the wound in the flesh, and another one over the hand that holds the fingers.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then put the cautery on the sign of the wrist until you reach the bone; and if you do not reach it at once, if it recurs again another time until you reach the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and beware carefully that the bile does not escape when you do the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	so as not to burn it.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so let the patients not die from this.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And instructs you to know that when you do not come close enough to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their measure, and of adults also great according to their measure;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days' treatment, take away the cauterized wound with butter until it is healed.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after the patient has recovered from other treatments until he is fully healed, and lay the sick person on their back for forty days, so that the wound may be well-healed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that their menstrual periods be slow to dry up, so that the bowels do not burst when they are going to move in the chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, dress him in a well-made bandage and bind it for another forty days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	And give a good rest, so he works little and guards himself from excessive drinking and eating, and from drinking too high.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he follows this teaching so is made completely whole.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after his treatment in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the operation on the abdomen.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When wounds come back in other places and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow again, if you apply cauterization according to its size, then take out one-third of the cure.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the treatment as we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients has said that you should cauterize with the fire at three angles according to this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the left side of the wound and make a line for its width, and another one afterwards, and tie your thumb tightly around the entire cauterization.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more gentle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of olden pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any member, whether from a fall or from injuring it, and the pain lasts for a long time, and medicine cures are not effective, then it is necessary to be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and to be cauterized according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twisting and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if he is well after the first cauterization, it is good.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
de meselerie	Of clumsiness
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The trouble is treated with no success by cauterization for great help, and the same illness that comes from the rotting of pus and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	You can view cauterizer, take care that if the patient is at the beginning, and if he is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not cut or stop moving, and you doubt that corruption seeps into the entire patient, then make cauterizers on the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	i have removed the hair from the head, and on the other side of the forehead to the end of the eyebrows;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and one above the two horns, and one behind on the heel;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and I leave your hand in such a way that the cautery comes to life just before the bone, and so much so that the scales come out strongly, so that the vapors of the large humors can come out.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cut on the mouse according to what it is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if there is a separation everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is clearly visible, so it is wise to use one of the cauterization techniques that we have mentioned earlier, and 1 cauters on the neck, and 2 in the throat area, and 6 on the spine at the back, and 1 on the groin and the other 1 on the lower back, and 2 on the shoulder blades.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and 2 on the sides, and 2 on the tendons of the leg, and 1 on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the depressions of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of the nails that are on top of the dead man's thigh, lest you burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and at no time should the cautery be made on the bone of the finger joint, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that when you do more cautery, the patient will gain more aid and benefit.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the sick do not feel pain from cautery at all, just as they feel it when they are healthy, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is fitting that the fire cautery should be large or small depending on the member and joints, as you will find in various iron tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, wash the patient with flour and honey several times until they are healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When an inflammation comes to any member and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, but the patient does not recover, then you should do cautery on the member according to its size and shape.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and so let the cauterizers take a little of the flesh where it is red.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment for pains such as this until they are cured.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And no one is cauterized by hand and foot and back until the nerve is muted and the limb becomes stiff.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and no one interferes with this if it is not known by one who understands the members and the movements of the nerves.
de albaras	De albaras translates to "of wounds".
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the illness called "albaras" is old and worn out, and medicine does not help, then cauterize with a cautery, taking a little of the flesh to the depth of the redness, so much that the blanching comes out, and the color fades.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then the doctor gives them a mixture of flour from wheat and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from a colt and blood from an alder tree, one part from each;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let everything be mixed together, and tie it with a cloth, and apply to the patient until they are healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure of cancrer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancrer comes at the beginning, and you look to stop it, then cut with cautery on the cautery that seems to be around the entire circle of the cancrer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And all the wise men say that one should also apply fire cautery to the middle of a wound.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and all the wise men do not seem good to me, because I fear that it will cause ulceration and corruption, and I have never been able to bring this about.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and the most troublesome thing is that they are cauterized inwards, with the cauterization called "circle", just as we have said of other cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of an edema that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays dying because of its overflow or the old age of the sick man when he is very weak, and he has little blood, or because his time.
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and to see it hasten to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	and therefore the cautery should be cut off with many small cauteries in pricking.
aprés le laisse ensi.	after which he is left so.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	It will soon die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced all with the cautery, so that the cauterization is of this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauterization has pierced the vein, and so that the cauterization is made with such precision that the patient feels pain before it happens in this manner, so that the course of the infection may be delayed.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until he is perfectly recovered.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cautery by iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of disease that is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a gangrene of the limb, because it corrupts the limbs in the same way as fire corrupts dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a person who can suffer fire cautery together, then take small and large nails, as much as is needed to the person or according to the disease.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	after the cautery of all parts until you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing remains except that all that is corrupted be destroyed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let him lie for three days, and put on the patient's cauterized wounds with a cloth soaked in oil until the scalds from the fire are destroyed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After this remedy is done with generated splinters.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that a healthy child does not come out, it's good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if this does not happen, then resume the cautery on the one who has been left in a state of corruption.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this remedy has never been cured with medicinal water instead of the cautery of fire.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but that all cauteries of fire are of greater aid, and I have already said the remedy of medicinal water in division.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of worms that come to the bones.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that at the bones due to weakness a disease is born which is called "closed" according to our intention, and it is a big thing that wounds the bone.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the fire cauteries of this disease are according to two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, cauterizing with fire, and cauterizing with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Cautery of fire is that you heat the cautery hair like a goose feather, and let it be made of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate the nail in all parts, and have subtle margins;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After the he made it all hot on the nail, and turned your hand around the nail so that it comes to its proper place;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and then lets him sit for three days until he begins to sweat out the pus;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then he makes an poultice of fresh raspberries crushed with thread, and lets the poultice on the entire wound all night, and the splinter will fall out and be loosened from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the joint with application of heat until it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they have converted to fever, and it often happens in the hands and feet, then you should apply cauterization with hot water.
et est en teil maniere:	and is done in this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a thorn or iron nail, or a feather from a quail, and put it on the splinter and the flesh, that is to say, to press out warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	Instruct the patient to put the tourniquet on so that it pricks all around; and then put a little of hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn so that the margin of the tourniquet comes to the root of the nail, and can find its way through deep into the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient suffer a little from the heat of the water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then let him go so that he will all bleed out to its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Instruct a doctor to do this after that one, until you have checked all those who are in the body, then cure the limbs that bind tightly.
li cure dou trembler	cure of shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some are trembling from cold or from fever of the fourth kind, or from another disease, it is fitting that you make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, and one cauterization between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and take care of the foot, and apply the olive oil cautery to the stomach.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	if he will relax, and quickly recover from the disease of cold fever.
des pustules puans	of painless boils.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never appear in its natural state the chest's boils or painless boils, which come from corrupted large matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	if it is wise to cut first, when they appear that one does cauterize each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle cauterization with a fustel of myrtle wood, so that the point is gripped by fire, or with an aristoletum root, or with the lenticular cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And at no time do cauterize it in the beginning when they appear this way, for according to this method, and they cannot increase or worsen beforehand, but the superfluities which come from it are ruptured, and healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it is necessary to do this after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when an artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Often happens great bleeding of the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or in the incision of the abscess, or by fire cautery on the member, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and is very pitiful to clean.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And everyone sees that when this happens on anyone, if you hasten to put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and press much so that there is no more blood, and the pain is not felt.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then puts the olive oil cauteries, small and large, into the fire until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Instruct the patient to put on the cautery first, or a small one according to the wound and its location, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your thumb, and keep it there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the fire jumps up when you lift your two fingers over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take haste and take another cautery that is on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing this one after another, until the bleeding is stopped.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And beware that you do not burn the nerve near it, and that no other harm comes upon the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when the artery is not cut during the procedure, it cannot be properly closed itself because of the large artery. If so, this should be done by one of the four ways we have mentioned previously.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cautery, or by extracting it when it is not treated, or by tying it tightly with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to close the wound.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And if bound and strained occurs.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will provide restening of a tightly bound member by covering it with bandages or putting hot things on top of it, or other similar things, unless there is no benefit.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens when he has no remedy or medicine present, then he must put his two fingers on the wound vein as we have said, and stretch it well so that it remains behind the wound and the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and he must not move it, but let the moisture of the frosty cold water soak in, so that it becomes very cold, until it is frozen and thickened and remains behind.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and face the wound forward for those who need cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on the treatment of cuts.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	As we have said in the first chapter, for every disease whether it requires cauterization with fire or with hot medicine, and the symptoms, causes, discharges, and forms of the cauterizations;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have placed that chapter of the surgery on the forehead just above the bone, and I will go into this same chapter by the same path because what is found there is more easily found than what we see.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I begin this work, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first cautery, and therefore it must be approached with greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; or it is doubt and fear, and many die.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to be foolish.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come in for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if they come from those who have been so affected by their illness that they die easily because of the strength of their suffering, and the great power of their malady;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and of these things one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And as to what is said to you by this physician, and says:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am cured.
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the sickness is stubborn.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not fitting for you to only take advice from those who come to visit you in this manner, but rather put more consideration into your honor than into your covetousness, and do not be weak-hearted but wise about what you are certain of, and what you have acquired.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your sick patients to what end the salus (good health) is converted.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you gain a better reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three most precious sons, our Lord gives you good understanding and right judgment, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I shall translate the text line by line into English.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The chief full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	It is observed that this disease comes often in children when the child strains too hard at the head.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And sometimes it comes from a return that is not known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease occur in adults, and all those that I have seen have had the mouth closed.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And for this reason, I think it is worth wasting some time on treating the joint in several ways.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I see that the child's knee was swollen with water, and every day its head would swell so much that it could no longer sustain.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and he believed so much about moisture that it killed him, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone above the spleen, between the kidney and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the wounds are such that if moisture is between the kidney and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a wide incision in his chest.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and be as long as ours, so that the moisture runs out;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and cut it there in the shape of a spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more deep, and the abscess is bigger, then you should make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	and if the moisture is under the bone, and you see signs in that place, such as the commissures of the chest opening on each side, and the blood spurts out when you press it with your hand inside, but does not return:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If you must cut open his head three times according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, take out all the moisture that is flowing.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After binding the incisions with strips and powder, and applying wine and oil, let it so until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then cut away the wound, and treat it with poultices and ointments, and let the head be strained out to greater size, and then give the patient dried meat in small portions until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incision is that you look at or open the depth of the abscess and the assembled fluid;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for she never occurs before.
aucune fois derrier;	never after.
aucune fois en destre;	Never at any time
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never on the left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Length then in either the opening of the abscess or the filling of the water, and do what you are able.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and guard so that you do not cover the artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	And be careful that the vein is not cut off, so that the patient may die from the progression of the blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of lead.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it has happened to any disease that is called "cough" and affects the eyes or the worst, and the disease is old and does not benefit from medicinal treatment, then the last remedy is to cauterize with what one covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is therefore necessary, when you cover their eyes, that the patient should make his face to his head.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	After rubbing the forehead with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then strip the patient's neck of all that cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein breaks, and the veins of one and the other are after the ears, and they are not returned.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the veins of an artery, then cut one and the other with a well-made spoon (or two-part instrument), until the vein reaches the bone, so that it be according to the size of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, pour out the spatumile under the artery and cut it above, in cutting as much as two parts to pass through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, make it stop without any further bleeding continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is fitting that you measure the space of three digits, then mark and cut until the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and what is fitting to put fire into the wound if it is six pints (of blood), and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the bone remains at that spot after cutting, so that there is no discharge from the wound, then strain the wound and bind it, and provide care with ointments until it is healed.
de emigrainne	is coming from
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old inflammation comes, and a catarrh is good, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and the ancient sore, and similar things, and it is treated with various kinds of medicines and cure medicines, and all this does not benefit him, if we cut out the arteries from the temples and the cauterized parts, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of their extraction when it is so that the patient makes his hair on his temples fall out and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well with pounding, and is not replenished quickly like in most men who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is replenished, then straining the neck of the patient with certain cloths, then rubbing him with any rough cloth, and raising him in hot water until the artery appears clearly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula of what is this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it up high with pins, and remove well the threads that are beneath each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, then turn [the bone] with the point of the needle, and cut from that part according to the quantity of the two shoulder blades.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it will not be severed, do not leave it attached without any pain or discomfort at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And pull out six times the thickness of the veins, five just beneath them;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is great, it is suitable that you tie it with two levers of a double strong thread of silk, that no infection appears before the sound of the wound, and comes after the blood.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then bind the swelling that is between the two joints in this hour itself, and then, if you see, if he cuts with the cautery of the cutting knife just at the bone until the joint is cut;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and it is the work of breaking, if the patient does not have fever and he has a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cautery is an aid to finish drying swells:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is of greater help in drying swells.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, you should fill him with warm linen and put them on top of well-made tents;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when you remove them, treat him with dry medicines that make charcoal, and tents, until he is cured;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if you do not take care of the artery so that it is torn apart as you work, then hasten to cover yourself with cautery, or apply lead to your hand so that the blood does not stain.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	And if you do not have it in stock, then put on the lead as soon as possible, and let it freeze with cold water until it is frozen solid, and bind it as is needed.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And this that is sharper and more delicate in the extraction of the artery should be cauterized with a vein of this cautery, striking two parts, but let the strikes be well spaced to keep its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the urine is too dark, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And you must have a pound of large iron between the two strikes, and then when you've applied the sealants to the two parts, place your hot iron on top so that it comes into contact with the bone, and strike the vein in two.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and let them separate between the two shoulders because there is no soldering of this fire cautery with all in all;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	from tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins on top of the forehead and there is no benefit from the medicine we apply, and you see the face of the sick person turning red, and feel a sense of pain in the front, like when one is faint.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	And the wounds are kept moist and wet so that the hairs of the papillae are burned, and the papillae are scorched by the heat of the tears, if it is necessary for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it the "cure contuse", and so you should instruct the patient who has this sickness to trim their hairs on the forehead, then make three incisions or cuts on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	And so it is one of the cuts like this as two fingers touch the front, and they go inside just as they were when they came out, and the other two are as two fingers touching above the paper, and be careful not to make an incision on the arteries which are located above the papers.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And move your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and cut each wound three fingers deep through.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and apply a piece of sponge and a lot of bandages to absorb the blood, then pour the spatula good with two parts of it which is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	of the incision that is just above the temple, to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scorch all the wound that is between the two cuts to the whole length above the bone, then make another incision from the first one up to the other second, and then pull out this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you cut into the fire with command of the physician let him let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the scalpel cutting towards the raw flesh at the point, and the back of the scalpel soft towards the bone, and let it cut until it reaches the middle wound.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut the veins that go down from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous, just as long as the vein opens at the heart, and then make another cut in the middle split until it reaches the other door.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then extract the vein evenly, and press out the blood for the wound taken.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put a tent of white linen in each cut, and place wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and salt, and keep them away from the abscesses.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day loosen the bandage, and anoint it with plantain water, then the treatment of ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other remedies used to treat wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Do not move your eyes.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When some come with swollen eyes, accustomed to this, and you see the eyelids closed tightly, and the vision weakens, and the papers burn;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hairs swell up, and at the forehead it causes great pain, and the patient is upset;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Therefore, by these occurrences you know that those materials and this swelling come from many veins, and the mother who is, if she is, then this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to cover his forehead, then make a great incision in front of the forehead, and another small one behind.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And from the wound of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision just beyond the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and withdraw your hand from between the temples that move to the lower side;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is uncovered, if you suck out all the blood from an sponge, and then put cotton wool between the two lips of the wound;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then tie the patient up with wet cloths in wine and oil, and keep them away from the wound.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is an ulcer, if you wish, then rub the bone until it starts to come out, and treat with remedies that are cooling, which make it dry.
En teil maniere:	In this way:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of willow bark, and make it infused.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and apply the mixture to these wounds to cool down by all means.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the rupture of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that comes out of your ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or gravel, or ore of iron, or a stone like metal.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	If the seed dies, as if you were to eat it, fever, boils;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or defluent (blood flow) as if with fever and coldness and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear stone or another kind of thing that does not adhere to the ear, nor grows in the ear, if one puts the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see a stone, if any small amount of purple oil or oil of sement is distilled from it, then perform extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and make it (the stone) vomit, and let the nose be plugged as vomiting comes, and put a piece of cloth or wool into the ear;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and place the ear on top.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	often it comes by this cure;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if she does not come (by the cure), perform extraction with subtle pins, for this is her form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If they fall onto pinches, this is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if that's not the case, then administer extraction to the tumor under a small, fine incision;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if they do not fall onto pinches, then make a chain of thorns and pour the chief into the chain or ear canal very tightly, so that what's stuck in the chain with molten wax cannot enter again.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	and then let it form a scab, because it often comes as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come with blood in that manner, take glue of what caught the hairs, and grab the surrounding tissue, and put in some instrument having a pointed end to do this, and put a little cotton around;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the gluteus muscle above the bone or whatever is present, and pull.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not pull from all these things that we have said, then hasten to pierce the cartilage and vein so that spasms occur.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the manner of the incision is that you first make the patient healthy of the cephalic region, and extract blood according to its virtue; then place the patient between your hands, and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or where it depends.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	And make the incision as thin as a crescent moon, until you reach the bone; then extract the bone according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the healing will take place.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if this is swollen with pus, extract it;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot come out, then apply a small poultice on the spot according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that sort.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think the pus is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then pull it out with subtle force and to the surgeon, just as we have said, so that the extraction may be easy.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water therefore what is cast into the ear should be used by the sick of mustard and comfits first, and fill the ear with fine cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And it can also be placed above that same ear or in the water itself.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it falls down because of this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if this does not work, then insert many needles according to the length of your treatment and gentle ones, and let it lie on fire for a little.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	And put the patients on one side with a perforated ear, and let it fall off from the other part of their feet, and be afraid of another pierce in the pierce that is in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not cease to make pierce in pierce until the wound is completely healed, and then let it heal completely.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, if the joint is pressed, and pour one of the ashes into the ear, and the other part presses with fire until the hottest joint is burned;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then again do other joints until the wound is completely healed, just as we have said in the pierce.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the best, if it is a small bone, just like a thorn and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	But if she is of great body, then you can feel it, so perform an extraction of pinches.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and this is the lighter thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	When extracting worms you should treat the ears, just as we have said in dividing and treating dilutions, but if the cure does not profit, it is wise to look at the ear by sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if there are no worms, if the wound has subtle pinches, and if they do not appear, then you take a piece of string because it is this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it may be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And pour out the most subtle poultice into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then form a whole string:
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this as often as they (the doctors) wish because all the people will see it.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to cut, then tie the pipe of cotton inside as I said in the stone.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not swell as we have said, administer dilutions just as the ancient ones have proven in the operation of worms, and you will find them or treat with dilutions.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you pour your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, because it is the form as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether made of silver or lead, take away from the smallest openings and above the overhangs to dilute.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And to press within the dilution in the lead instrument well made for this, and if you see take the rasp and wrap it around the tip of the cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then take your oil or juice, and that which you see of your medicine in the cage, and let it be on the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then pour into the ear canister all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or comes out near the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the patient feels it inside, and then the distillation is heated more so that, as we have distilled in the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and beware it does not get too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the rupture of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without any defects in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and this same thing happens at home because of a stopped-up wound, or of an arrow shot into the ear, and these stoppings come to be in the ear sometimes from within, if one cannot see them;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And sometimes happens that the poor man is bereft of sight, and his eye sees ill.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	Therefore, when it comes to the point where he cannot see it, if it is due to a sickness of more than one disposition, and in that case you should put the ear of the sick person towards the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and look inside.
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If you see the opalescence appearing, if the work has the entire spectrum of color because this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And whether it shines and glows in front of and behind all equally, if the ear does not bleed;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the opalescence is of color or bone of the ear, if you have subtle points and pierce lightly so that the color is completely gone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	If the inflammation is deep in the ear, then take a subtle razor and shave it lightly with hot ashes, then put on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the throbbing of what the patient feels is grief in the ear, carefully perceive it, and do not press on the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then put into the ear a tent according to the size and size of the perforation, and the poultice in the Egyptian manner.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this on no day until the wound is closed, or you take a poultice and apply the poultice in rose water, and powder with vitriol broken.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear swollen, apply the poultice and move another moist poultice made of olive oil and wax, until the swelling is removed;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal him until he is fully recovered.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If there is bleeding from the nose, plunge a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that take away the swelling of the nose which are used to treat nasal bleed.
de la char des papieres	about the ashes of paper.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This ailment that comes on when the eyelids are moist and dry, you should stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and cut off one root of a plant, from its root.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then put on the eye vitriol and break it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if you do not remove it, then the cautery of the lens subtlety will be cut, and cutting after the incision will be afoot.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	And often repair, for no part remains of its roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cautered with fire, the roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the flesh
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Often come in the form of eyelids some things that resemble wart in shape and hardness, and for this disease is called "grandine", and it is a mass of moisture thick on the paper above and below;
li ovraiges est telz:	The injuries are thus:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	If one is wounded on both sides and it's a light thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	So then he cuts to the bone on both sides, scours it lightly from each part, picks out the stitches, and copes.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cover it with a covering of skin, piercing the paper so that nothing harms the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the cut is great, so he sews it up with a stitch, and treats until it heals;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it's small, then don't make a fuss, because the ointments restore it immediately and irritate the skin.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the pus is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then you must press and squeeze it, and pick off grains with tweezers, and strike one side and the other.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it causes no pain.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the grains are picked off, wash away the salted oil from the wound, and treat the patient with a salve until they become healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	From the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Then this is a fat that is gathered in the threads of paper above, and it has happened to many children who are born with no one to care for them, and they suffer greatly from their eyes, and they come to have diarrhea in the mornings, and cannot see the light of the sun because their tears obscure their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and because of this they lie on their faces afterwards, and sleep on them, and their papers below their eyelids are moist that the swelling and appearance have covered from the recent incision which has opened in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the liver with your fingers and feel the exinach within it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	and he will sit on a clean one;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then he will take a linen cloth, and fashion a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity contained within each part, then puts it on.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your two hands from one side and the other, so that the incision is gathered in the middle of the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moist area a cut to the spot with a sharp point, not larger than the wound you made on the vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	And let the skin be stretched over the fontanelle until you see it open.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And from other openings of the wound come the exit of the flesh, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Take then at once a whole piece of linen cloth between your two hands, and turn your hand to right and left until it is even.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	And take care that you do not put anything into the wound, until you come to the entire surface of it, without burning it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the opening does not come at the beginning of the wound, then carefully cut a little wider the wound lightly until it appears.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Now take the head of the shoulder and tie it with bandages in silence and water, and put on the patient, and stretch of bending.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if some of these men who cut up silks and put them on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure should be safe.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes to a joint abscess, then the cure of emplastrumes applying so long as he is sanitized.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs from paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When the hairs are born on someone other than their nature, and they are grown weak, if you prick them, it brings about various kinds of maladies such as excessive tearing and swellings of the skin, and albugen (a condition characterized by a whitish coating), until it is the cause of destroying the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and there are four kinds of cures according to
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by fire cautery in assembly, or with water according to what is before the chapter of cautery, and it is made either by incising and suturing, or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the head of the sick person on your healthy one; then turn the paper of oil to your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it is turned, that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if this is not so, then insert an awl into the whole of the upper limb.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and whoever is on the margin of the paper or where the hair grows from these hairs, and take out the filament to above all the paper, and turn it by the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs near them, all along the spatulum, copying from the great line to the little.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then take out the filament, and put under the paper a small tent of linen and drapery, then draw up on the paper an image of an incision, like the spindle of myrtle, so that it is fitting according to the quantity you see extract the paper which is drawn all over.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if to one who has need, we put together great quantity of the paper according to how soft the paper is.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make it all over the spectrum of paper on both lines that you signed and begin with great care just a little.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairline in the growth of a root, then pour on it in one of the two corners marked with the letter, then scorch it entirely.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then sew the two lips together with an arrow of an awl to all the fine thread of wool, and let out the blood, and make dry the surplus of hairs on both eyelids at all sticky things, if you see this being done;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if this is not the case, if you do not have treatment, then leave the wound and hairs for three days or four.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then treat the wound with sutures of dried and tied things, for the paper comes alive at the moment of the wound and its assembly, but the thread is worn out (as they say the old ones), and it's work that causes fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and so that you mark the paper of a figure like the root of myrtle, as we have said, three inches in thickness according to the shape which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut off the thing that is surmounting them equally according to their form.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you do not have the power to hold the pliers and things are not even, then prick with a needle or take one thread, and bind the paper around the figure:
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and cut I another strand of hair from the great temple, and the second strand from the small one, and join them together equally between your two hairs.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then raise your hand equally, and raise all the skin where you have stitched, just as we have described, then assemble both lips of the wound by suture, and treat until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar salve healing.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and at no time has the hair of the paper been converted.
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	so it is fitting to use what we have said about the incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The healer of the wounds does so according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and then convert the paper and the flesh into flesh according to what you said, and then do two wounds by art, and two subtle ligatures also as long as the paper and the width of the span of a finger are;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and strike at two joints, on each side where you hold the thread;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then join both together subtely above what overhangs from the paper of the oil, and strain the two wounds from each side forming;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let him be thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will wither and turn red and become dry, just as it does by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If late, if the patient has some strength, then treat them until they are well.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is healed and the paper (wound covering) is lifted, and no longer will they hurt.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And that is the shape of two channels which you will make according to this figure and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the openings are such that you take a sharp needle and insert a fine thread of silk into it;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then assemble the channels and do not insert one or both of them sharply, but so that the lengths of the threads are about a palm's length.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then put another fine thread of silk in the chase briefly, and no the thicker threads.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the patient's head on your healthy one;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and let it be clear by the sun, for this is a subtle and small wound, then plunge the needle into the entire field on the root of the attached hair, and pierce through the paper hastily until you bring it out above the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull out the hair until you reach the needle, and pour from the needle that hair, if there are one or two or three or more of them;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then pull out your hand until the hairs have reached the entire length with the needle in the paper along with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the needle is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the needle downward to the end of the thread that you have ordered, until the needle reaches through the holes above and you see it by the sight of the oil.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then therefore take out the arrow and the thread, and pour on the oil and let it be left for two or three days until the hair grows in its place and the arrow comes up.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hairs are small, then take along one long hair from each knee, and lift it up with that which you leave, until they grow out and then lift them.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil's rot
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this illness is called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes into the oil, there are two kinds of it.
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens suddenly by a wound, or incision, or cauterization, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the treatment for it is that you break the adhesion, and dress the lips, and put in linen tents, and keep them until they are healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and therefore it is not suitable to use only this method when treating sick things that contract and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but works of things that soften, as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and when rose water or ale and seed of flax are cooked, and ointments made from melted diyaquilon in any of the oils, and a tent is covered with it, this cure.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasures of your cure are that you should guard yourself not to corrupt them in any way according to their former form;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have said are not fire but rather a mere description of this disease, which will not return according to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the charcoal that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is under that name "axacrati", and is truly called "accident" by nature.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from a wound and a cut, and a cautery, and similar things.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the vein of the work is that you pierce an awl, with a thread double in it, and strike it into the flesh, and you make it pierce from the left shoulder joint as far as the right, so that the thread runs through two joints of the arm;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then stretch the flesh above all the way to the top of the awl, and strike with the broad blade.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the mark on the paper returns as it should be, that's good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if that doesn't happen, take the razor and put it into the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts on one side inside the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	And let the ends of the two incisions be tied to the two corners of the cut you have made, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure will be just like the figure of the letter 'I' from which "I griesche" is derived.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then cover the wound with cartilage, according to the quantity of its ribs that are above the skin, as if it were a paper, and then add the two parts of what is needed, and tie the ends with a thread of linen.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the treatment of those that we have said about medicinal powders, and poultices, until he is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a cut or a seam or a cauterization, then it is fitting that you make a clean cut below the hair of the skin on the paper, and according to what was said before;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then cut through between the second and third fingers of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one must make the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise masters will take out from any kind of poor power how he can restore the figure to its natural form;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the patients themselves, according to those things that they need of work and treatments for more numerous conditions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this wound has occurred in the fingers in such a way that the paper above is sewn with the white of oil, and cannot move or do its natural works, then you must if necessary, put the point of a rasp over the paper and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	And let the extent be pinched, as long as you copy what is astringent on the subtle spoon, which should not be too harsh or too thin, so that the patient cannot suffer from the spoon being too harsh or causing the oil to congeal;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And let your incision be, so that you do not scorch the assembled flesh lightly, according to its natural form;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	And let it heal completely the assembled flesh, and there be no occurrence of pus in the oil, and let it be raised with a mild broth, and vinegar.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then put a linen cloth between the paper and the oil, and place on it the oiled woolen linen soaked in plenty of wine;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after three days, apply with vinegar and other urgent remedies until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the unclean oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	The joint has two kinds:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It is either nervous and seems to have the color of dried mud, or it is not nervous but seems frozen with dampness, so that when touched with iron and handled like a splinter, it will not yield.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	And both of them seem to be advancing towards the great veins, and grow little by little until they cover the whole eye and all the light, and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And there is the way of incising it that when a patient places his head on a healthy one, then he opens his eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	And lift the paper to his hand, then pinch the joint with small stitches of double-needle and spread it upward.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	Now take a needle, and put it into the hair of a horse, or an ass, or a bull, and pull it tight.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle slightly and push it into the hair of the body, and pierce all the way through the nail, and tie off the nail with a thread and stretch it up high, and scrape down to the entire length of the hair where the prickly hairs meet the smooth hairs just above the head, then cut the remaining part from the root of the armpit to the base of the neck, using subtle movements and small forces, and leave the natural color of the arm, so that by the incision there is no bleeding from the eyes as is commonly accustomed;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and at times they stretch only the nail and the thread, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then the scrape is applied to the entire surface of the scab, as this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And beware that the scab does not touch the raw skin and break it, and the wound is not perceived.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, put a little powder of flaxseed in oil on it, and apply a poultice to the neck, and let it remain until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then take care of him so that he may be healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the ingrown nail is not sensitive, and you cannot push the nail, and the nail cannot be inserted, then this appearance of an ingrown nail can often be cured with medicine.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow so that I have told them in the division, and if you see it covered, let oil be applied to the patient, and take the spoon with gentle touch according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And remove the ingrown from beneath subtly, and if you see that it is not reducing at all and the reason is pressed, let distill from your mouth into the oil mixture made of litargire and red collander and heat the oil just as yesterday;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then resume the other work according to this same procedure, until it is all bony.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the oil, like an abscess on your foot, then let the pus, and cure the abscess first so it is healed, and then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the fatty tissue with the scab in the oil causes great suffering, and they suspend it to the tumor, and cut off a part not too much, so that no blood from the wounds comes;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill in oil of collier's red, which is made from litarge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows above the pupil.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Are some men born with no red color, and covered by a mole, restrained in the papers and torn under the protection, and seem like a rose of balaste.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and if the wounds are thus that the patient puts his head on your healthy one, then he opens the eyes, and cools all that char has useful needles for it, and supports with strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cuts the first char, and goes copating to the rasping tool just until the end, and keeps you so that you do not bleed on the wound.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and if the incision of the spatulum is such that we have said in the incision of the ungula and with little force because one oeste himself so soon as the form after this chapter demonstrates;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the incision is completed and all of the flesh has been removed, apply oil of silk or distill cordial red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil with a clean cotton cloth wrapped around it;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	But if it does not take effect, and the flesh is bare and you suspect a severe infection, then leave the oil and treat the infection with soothing medicines.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work once you are certain that it is healed, and then tie the char ( likely referring to a type of bandage or wrapping ) in oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But it is necessary that you lighten the treatment of each person, as the weak oil has been found to follow the natural way.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	And from an accidental vein, as a result of iron.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand on any of these wounds until you see that this limb is suffering as a result of the wound.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes' veins
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These veins are red and covered on the eye's surface, and they tolerate their injury and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is thus in the first instance that you must look to see if the skin is inflamed, whether it is red, swollen, and there are no other diseases but inflammation.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	and then cut the flesh in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	command the patient to put his head on your sound cheek, then suspend those veins all over the skin according to his wisdom, and let the subtle ones be doubled in this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be two on each side according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then cut with force those subtle veins, and sew the wound an hour after another, until you see remove those fiery veins from the flesh.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And keep in mind that the hairs at their base are not to be pinched until they grow long.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, if you mix the oil with green and red colicerver to destroy what is left in the wound.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you do not have the power to cleanse all of this in that hour, then apply a plaster on the oil with soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and let it remain for some days until the pains are alleviated and there is no more swelling, then resume according to this manner till you become healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The mire is called "arissati" fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	How you cure her by cautery and with medicine burning hot according to what I have previously said, and she is not healed, if there is an infection in it that you cut open above the abscess, where it must die, and extract all the moisture that is in it, until the bones are exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bones are exposed and you see the corruption and blackening, if there is the form of that which is now
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "aspère chief", and it should be made of fire into the chief region, and pointed as sharp as a nail just as if it were in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put the sharp instrument on the bone that has corrupted, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand firmly enough so that you know that this corruption is healed:
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this every time, then restore the limb with medicinal extracts.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the limb is swollen, and it festers, and the bowels are swollen, and remain so for 40 days, and do not heal or swell, and no great accidents come to pass, then you know that they are healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	but if this does not happen, then there is no other treatment than to return the fistula to its natural position according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and that you uncover the bone the second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it heals, uncover it so that it is as it should be, and fix the iron pin in three angles, and thin out the fistula just until the head of the chest.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	After the fire cautery, instruct the patient to put on the plaster over the wound, and then remove your hand from it for a little while, then turn all around until you find the bone and feel the malady because he holds his hand under his chin;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the patient's life with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the head and flesh have hardened like that, he will eat the material under his chin;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the oil's issue.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eye is open all the time, and it does not come to disturb or ease the pain, then you must tie the patient down;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then dress it, then put ventouses or haters on to harm because of the bleeding, then put oil made of ice and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the oil, and apply plaster to wounds with bandages and cloth;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And the manner of dressing wounds is that you take soft cloths and wrap them around each other in four folds, and then place one on top of the other according to how many the limbs have need.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then tie with a hard bandage under and reapply the ventooses to suck out since injuring.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the ventooses and let the oil stay tightened day and night, and if you tie him in a bowstring, then it is convenient to tighten him much.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then untie the bowstring after day and night, and if you see the oil repaired, it is good.
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	if so, then reapply the plaster and the cloths and tie the bowstring and the ventooses until he is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	A drop of blood from a vein.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When discharges come into the eye, then open, and there comes out of the papers as when grains of resin, and it is unbelievable to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	And therefore if you cover the eye, the operations are such that you insert a needle into the root of the part from which the hairs come down to that point above; and then you insert another needle where there is a double thread at the corner of the tear.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut the thread with the double fiber and tie a part of the eye shut, and hold it well, then pull out the needle and put oil on linen moistened in abundance of water;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it remain until the fibers stick to the eye, then apply the oil to comforting things until the wound is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and sometimes the wound is restrained by the urine from each part of a circular cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes have great appearance, then cut with a sharp instrument at the corner of the spur that emerges from the puncture made in the oil-filled canal and flowing along the white pus and descending into the eye, and enter immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the fat of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This illness called "alcanatti" is not from fire only when the bowel is filled with oil, resembling cold water flowing down, but it's not truly cold water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of its appearance is that you should make the patient lie on an specially prepared chair and straight, then take the head in your hands two parts, and pull it until you see the bowel coming up to your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then let it settle, and do not remove or draw out and be scattered the light, so that you can see the patient's condition as usual.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if they do not come out at the right time, know that it is an infection, and when there are bleeding from the mouth without being prepared as we said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	so sit the patient between your hands, then take the fine spoon and make it up to the thin membrane above by continuing the connection of the membrane with the membrane and the crown, until the mouth opens.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is drawn out, if it is taken and distilled in hot oil mixed with honey or in hot or fenugreek broth and honey, then the patient is treated again until they are cured.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil's water.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have the same signs as water in the division, and this is what you need to pierce.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if it is according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands and cross them with fires of light from the sun, and bind the good oil tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then put the paper of oil on your left hand if his eyes are to the left, or on your right hand if they are to the right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand if his eyes are to the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if they are to the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Instruct the patient to put the point of the instrument into the crown by the size of a finger in that bald place on the head where oil is placed near the smaller arm, then pour the instrument called 'almagda' into it wisely, and turn your hand until it pierces into the oil-filled bald place, and feel as almagda comes to the empty thing;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is fitting that the measure of the instrument almagda be the full width of the space from the prunella leaf to the end of the neck;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the oil crown;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the eye cornea, and then put the instrument next to it where there is water, and press out from one side after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the pain of this affliction has now descended upon him, then let him see the patient in front of him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After resting for a little while, and if the pain returns, place the force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise again, gently pull out as much of the pus as possible by turning your hand little by little.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put in water a small amount of the powdered gemstone, and rinse out that oil within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put the oil out by spilling or pouring a clean cloth soaked in olive oil and plenty of lye, and bind with the pure oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	So too, and those of our age, let us put on a common balm with plenty of lye.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	If the magenta cannot enter into the oil by its hardness, because it has two people who have too hard eyes, so you should take the instrument called "alberit", of which there is this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, and then pour out pus, as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and when the work is completed, the doctor attends to it, in case the patient falls asleep on his back in the dark room;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and let him be without any movements, and give him light food, and do not turn his head or arm to the left or right, and tie according to his disposition as if it were three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then let him put it back in the same dark place where he found it, and look at his eyes, and show him some things, and then tie up the wound for seven days.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not for you to do this in the surgeon's office or after the incision now, but rather to alleviate that, because the pain rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	if an abscess has come upon the wound, that you put it back into place on the seventh day, and follow the advice of one who knows how to treat abscesses.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is allayed, you put back his eyes and apply some oil to cover his face for one day, and place him in that same dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then he goes to visit her little by little, and she converts herself for her case;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and knows that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And there came one of us who was from the Irrach, who told us that in some distant land someone made a magical piercing to cure the water, but I have never seen it or known about it in our country, nor did I find any mention of it in ancient books.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and by chance it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And this are the appearances of magical forms, because they who do not know them see them.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and seem to be of pure matter:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the heads of the same subtlety, and the backs in threefold angle.
de la char sor le neis	Of the flesh at the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	No times are born or occur without some joint being dislocated, of which there are many that seem like scorpions at the end.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there is one where it has a scorpion-like joint with red flesh and another with yellowish bone.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	Therefore when that one scorpion is soft and not swollen, it is necessary to sit the patient between your hands facing the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and cover their nostrils, and let the pus run from those scorpions.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then take hold of it with a small spoon so fine that it can be held firmly on one side until you know that the scorpion is completely dried.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	If there is no remaining part that can be covered, if you apply all the subtle treatments lightly, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	But if it does not swell or form an abscess, if you cut as it seems.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if it's malignant abscesses, cut hastily and cauterize as long as the flesh is not stained and are all charred bones, then pour vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the vomit comes and moisture enters just to the face, it is a sign that he is cured.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if moisture does not penetrate as it should, notice that there is bone marrow left in the bones above, because the humors do not come to cut.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	And thus it is convenient to put a small thread of flax in the wound, with needles made of wood, and let no space be left between each one, for it must be at least.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the head of the patient with the thread in his nose for a little while, and treat with an odorant until it comes out through the nostrils.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and often this is done to children at school, and it's a light thing for the one who does it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and examine each in turn by smelling as we are near the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the flesh is not corrupted by it, then pull out the thread, clean the wound, and anoint the thread with Egyptian ointment, and place it back in its original position as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the ligaments have completely rotted away whatever is left of the flesh.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	And then apply a poultice of poultice made from onions for some days until it is healed, and if he needs dried remedies, he should use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, because one distills the oils and the medicines or poultices:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it should be of silver or lead, resembling a lamp with an opening, like a poultice, and the application should be similar:
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if it is a poultice, then make one closed and apply the instruments to purify the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and have the maiden hold the head by the hair so it does not touch when one is pouring hot oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the flesh at the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Often there is a disease in the head that is called "telul", and it grows and becomes great boils, until one sees something to behold;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this reason it is fitting to apply the treatment at first and destroy all the bone, then put on him the cautery or burning medicine;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if one delays applying the treatment until it becomes large, then take care to prevent its hardness, of red color, poor sense:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	if one does not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when one cuts it, there comes great mischief to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of a painful touch, not red from blood, and you see what it can be covered, then void the patient and look at the wound with fear, and treat him with dry things and restrain.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When they are struck and pierced
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	It is known that when a solution of continued continuity comes from one of these old cartilages, it profits little, whether in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	it is therefore necessary to look if this happens to anyone, if you examine whether the wound is fresh with all its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then add two stitches to the lip, and treat him until he is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are separated on both sides, it is necessary that you burn all the parts of their wound until they heal, then assemble the two lips with a stitch, and tie, and powder above powder of dragon's blood and bruised incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place the powders on a piece of plaster or another kind of plastering material sealing it up, and leave it until it sticks to him, then treat with plasters until he is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The way of suturing if you have to assemble:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we said in the suturing of the belly.
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, as I have told you before.
des apostemes des levres	of swellings of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Inside the mouth there is an abscess, resembling grains of rice, sometimes small and sometimes large.
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	so therefore you must return the lips and cut each one out, and take it with forceps and pierce into each part.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then apply the liquid to the wound after the vitreolite incision breaks, until it is stained.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the astringent of asphodel, and cure the wound with drying things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the teeth gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Often swelling occurs on the gum after the procedure called "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	if it is fitting to hold the swelling with tongs, and cut at its root, and allow the flow or the blood;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then put on the wound the broken vitreolite, or other restraining and drying powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if that one returns after the incision, and often happens, when you cut it again, and cauterize.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	If it does not return to its original place after the fire cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	And these are the forms of ulcers for covering.
des sordens	Of sounds
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Never are assembled at the head of the teeth within the mouth between the gums, rough and painful scales;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and wormy, until the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth rot.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	If it is fitting to make the patient sit between your hands, and their flesh be in your holy place, and if you remove the teeth or scales appear, as long as nothing remains there;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And do thus for the blackness and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are cleansed;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if one knows that there is at the first reason, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If this does not work, continue to repeat the second day and the second time, until you have gained all back;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and learn that the teeth have need of different forms of instruments to clean, according to what the work shows, because the raspers who have shaved the front teeth have other forms than those who have shaved between the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these forms and others are provided for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary to cure the tooth when it is in pain as long as you delay treatment, as much as you can, because this must not be done at all;
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is a very high substance, so we have no excuse for the fault.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is forced to have treatment, it is necessary that you be certain about the tooth's quality.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Often does the pain trouble the patient, and consider it to be of a saintly nature, and treat the good tooth.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and every remedy will not dispel the pain, as long as the foul discharge is present, because we have already wanted to do those remedies with these physicians;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are certain of the tooth that is infected, it is advisable to scorch around the entire tooth with a small, strong instrument to prevent the gum from spreading in all parts;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then the tooth will be cut with your two fingers or small tongs at first to clean them well, and then firmly hold the tongs;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	And so let the joints of the patient rest between your own bones, and his body well if it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the right tooth directly into the fracture, and if it does not shoot through, take any of these instruments and pour them inside each part lightly, and move it as you have done first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the teeth are perceived and broken, it is fitting that you fill them with fabric, in or where they are broken.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you tie tightly with nails, so that it does not break while being tied.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is fitting to apply a great deal of care over the gum for cutting the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take care well that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and return to the patient by the pain in the root, for greater pains than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not do thus as the ignorant masters who by their haste and by their recklessness break the chain, and bring forth nothing but what we have told.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but sometimes bring forth nothing but through the stench of this great disease because of the roots that remain, or by breaking the chain, as we have often wished.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the teeth are thrashed, so wash the tooth with wine or apple cider and salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if the wound closes with blood coming from it, which often happens, then apply vinegar to cut it.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if this does not work, so cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of ulcers are such that when you first treat the teeth with them, they have long pointed tips and large claws, which do not spread when pulling out the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	and these are:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have large limbs if they do not bend when pulled out, and they should be made of iron well-made, and have teeth to hold.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root stays at the operation site, it is advisable to put some cotton soaked in butter on the wound one day or two, until it becomes moist; and you take hold of the tongs which are called "algefri", because the joint seems like a mouth for care.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they are cut out in this way, as if by a file and it's the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to emerge at all these ties, so it is fitting that you uncover the whole root under which is the tie, and put the instrument which is called "althali", namely plain lance, in order that it is this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And so if it's rough and large if it doesn't break, and if the root jumps at this point, that is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if these do not work, then take aid with all the tools, so that the forms come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help with this instrument which has two roots, that's the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments which are in front on the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, that's the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And if this tool is so strong that it cannot break, and you see that much of the bone remains;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also of other symptoms, which are not described;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the wise masters of subtle arts treat themselves with their own instrument, according to what their works and illnesses show, because there are some diseases for which they do not teach any instrument, in case of breaking or other bones, or if it splits, since I told you so, and showed you how to seek symptoms, where is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone, which will not slip, but can hold and remove;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the healing medicine suitable to each one, and if there is rot in the bone, even if it is small, if you have all this instrument;
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the teeth appear not in their natural place and the form is ugly, and even in young girls, it is necessary to know if the teeth are new after the tooth, and are not in their proper position, and you cannot put them there.
adonques lou raie;	so that the edge can be made straight.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is hard with the tooth, take this instrument that has the same shape as the small beak, and is made of good iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the file touches and touches in every jaw for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the other teeth, and if it appears as if it can be sorted, take a piece of file as is its shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and is just like the flint with which one makes nails;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in flint, the tooth breaks and breaks with small blows until it doesn't move anymore.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the surface is smooth at the end, and if the teeth are too sharp and it bites the tongue, in order to equalize them so that they don't bite the tongue anymore or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth lock
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the teeth are in the lock, or by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press on that which he bites down with so much pain, and you have treated them with medicine-restraining, and this does not work;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if they are restrained with a thread of gold, because the silver threads rot and decay, but the gold does not move at all;
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, in proportion to the space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you see the teeth, take the thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then tie the knots between the injured teeth, as many as there are, until you reach with precision to the sound tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then resume the covering from just where you started, and strain your hand carefully and gently, until it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let your limb be tied to the root of the tooth if he cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the flesh of the thread with pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth, and set it so that it does not hit the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then let it set as tight as it can endure, and if he dislodges, or the threads come out, if they are strained with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it remains and serves as such for all its duration, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the address of two healthy teeth, and two missing ones, if you observe:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when a tooth falls out, so he puts it back in its place, fresh as fresh, just like we said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not let anyone interfere who is not wise and knowledgeable, for at no time was the shape of a tooth made from raw bone, rather he puts it back in its place where the deficiency is, and strains it as we have said, and leaves it there until it heals.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never is a swelling that comes from under the tongue or by nature, as one is born.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accident of a burned wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the wounds are such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and lift their head onto a healthy one, and lift the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	After the cautery, instruct the patient to tie the nerves tightly around the big joint, until the tongue is loosened from its place, and if there are hard swellings or wounds, and it causes sudden pain, then pour oil and strike at the big joint.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and be careful that the cut is not too deep in the middle part, for the artery which is below.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done that, lift the limb into warm rose water and oil, or cold water, then place the tongue on a linen bandage.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and let the patient with each night lie still in his bed so that he cannot get up.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	and if there is bleeding from the wound, then put on the limb vitriol, which is a burn.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if they do not take their medicine, then the cautery burns gradually, which is good for those who.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then the doctor prescribes another treatment until they are cured.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see a black or red color or hardness, so that the patient does not feel it, and do not touch it at all, because it is a chancre;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is leaning towards pus and there is moisture, then take the lump out, and make a cut with a small spatula, and deliver it from one side and the other;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if they do not take their medicine at the right place, then put vinegar drops on it until it is stained, and return to the right place until you treat them thoroughly;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then lift up the limb from the ailment and the disease, and let the healer do other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Evacuation of abscesses from the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	There is no occasion for a throat pouch called "goddath", and properly calling it the two tonsils, and when treating them, as we have said in sectioning, if they are not healed, be cautious:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is hard abscesses of small sense and fusel color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is big, do not touch it with iron, for the same reason as avoiding blood loss.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it be left to wither until it dies, and then you will cut it, for if you do not, it will burst on its own.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white color and the root is subtle, and you have prepared the instrument to cover, but first examine whether the apertures are closed and smoothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Therefore place the patient in front of the sun, and let his joints be in order, and he opens his mouth, and presses the surgeon's finger between his hands, so that this is the form.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and it should be of silver or subtle gold, as we use cutlery;
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you pick it on with a needle and the lancet into the almond, and pull out further than you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	And take no cloth with you, then cut with the instrument, for this is the form, which seems like force;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And all the nails are bent, and one at a time, and they are very good, and made of iron or of bronze;
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument, cut with shears, so that it is the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And it is cut in one way from one side, and another way from the other side.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have cut one of the apothecary's nails, cut the other in the same manner, and after incision, gargle the patient with hot and cold water, and with sweet vinegar, and with dried pomegranate rinds or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is cleansed;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the cure must be completed until they are healthy.
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And sometimes new abscesses are born in the throat other than those on the two mandrakes, if they tie them up then just like the two mandrakes tied.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was present in the throat, namely the small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I had tightly closed the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the canal that was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she died if she stayed like that for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses were so high that they had been put in two wounds on either side of the navel.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I then had it removed, and inserted one onion, then put in the fire, and a great portion of bowel;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then fix another part in the other perforated vein, and let the work proceed on the neck, and pressure is applied to the tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After injecting one into the abscesses, and cutting a part of it, only a little blood is drawn out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And after thus, the conduct of the throat was cut out in the woman, and now she began to drink cool water and then wine, and did not cease cutting at that abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscesses would recur later, and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	So then I placed it and cauterized inside the throat;
ensi demora sens croistre;	The body retains its shape longer;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And separate from these parts, and do not know but that God has made them for me.
de l’uve	Of the ulcer
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When it comes down to the vein, and it is folded back and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if she is too large and rounded, then it is called "vein".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cut just as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit from it, and you see that the pus has been appeased, and it is subtle, then it is fitting to copy it;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is rounded together and not long.
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	And she is bloody or of a foul color or black, so it is best to remove the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great risk on the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its size and length, to sit the patient in front of the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument with which we made the reminder before.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then insert the needle into the vein, and draw it out, and strike at the second and third points that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is best that you do not strike further than the surface that is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you strike too far, it will cause pain to the voice and speech.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, make use of what we have said about the incising of two almonds, and treat the patient until they are healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of cutting, it is fitting that you use an engine at the cautery of their fearful senses.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of the cautery is like water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And thus the patient puts their head on the healthy one, and then presses the tongue against the instrument which we have said about in this cautery, and compresses it with warm vinegar cloth, so that it is neither too thick nor too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and in using the head of this instrument, because there is the shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And they put one of their hairs or on the head, and apply the medicine, like the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine on the eye.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient is lying on their side, so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine within it, without descending to the throat or the spleen;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Instruct the patient to keep their hand in all of the medicine and press upon the eye, the quantity of a quarter of an hour, until you see it congealed and the bites of the medicine are appeased.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see (it congeal), take cotton and spread it upon any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and pour the instrument into the cotton canal, until the cotton adheres to the eye.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this frequently, until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry, and cast it after 4 days or 5.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you have need to reapply the cauterization of the medicine, if it recurs, and after applying the cauterization wipe under the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let them arise from cold water, and let them be cured of gargarems until they are sane.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This cure is more safe than the incision, although it is cauterization.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	for when she is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and avrune and similar herbs, and gather them all or any of them in one pot, and add them easily, and boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pots should be well-glued with strong earth, and in each pot there is an instrument of head according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And be it of silver or of tin, and one of the fingers be plunged into the mouth of the patient until the vapour mounts to the eye through the nostril, until the eye is suffocated;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After the thing is reattached, it often happens again and again until the wound dries out, and you must be careful not to do this at the beginning of a new abscess, because many things happen there.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not do this unless at the decline of an acute abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a needle and insert it into the patient's mouth with an arrow of fire, so that the tongue does not become too inflamed;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	because the arrow of fire does not give too much grease to the mouth, and this is a good remedy for salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Sometimes it affects the throat as if it were pierced with an arrow or a fish spine, or with nothing.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	So it is fitting that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun to all the instruments, so that you may see how things move.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And what cannot be seen and is returned to the throat, it is fitting that you make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	In case the thing becomes dry through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cake, or a root of lettuce, or dry bread.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and tie the string to the sponge, and then fasten it.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when she comes to the right place, if you see blood, and then pierce her.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come from what we have said, take an instrument of a plug according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And if the curved instruments are in the head so that they can more easily enter into the throat, and hold the head high.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all the blood come out, or push the bone inside.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and make sure that the patient pushes the instrument in, because he must see if it is moist or if the thing is rough.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if she pushes it out, or tries to push it for the length of the entire instrument, equal in all.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the cauterizing of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	never is medicine given without some medicine, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	When it does not profit at all, then look into the throat of the patient to the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound open, then if it has just one small thread or has very fine nails.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	But if that does not work, then take a candle hair, and pour it into the patient's throat, and pour or burn the length of the iron hot, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is poisoned with water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take full measure of cold water, and open the mouth, and let the liquid move to the tongue with frequent movements.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if it is quick for the patient who feels the cold, then vomit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	and if she does not vomit as we have said, then perfume the patient with asafoetida at the instrument I told you about in the fumigation of the nose;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do this many times, because she will vomit with tar.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of fumigation is that you hold a pot in which there are charcoal sticks, and place it covered with a sieve pierced in the middle, and in that hole, tie the handles of the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Instruct the patient to perform his own treatment; and let the head of the cane be placed in his mouth, and close the mouth, so that he does not inhale any smoke, but comes from just outside the nose.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and now the smoke will come out again, and if it does not come out, then repeat the fumigation many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and the patient suffers from thirst, and eats bitter, salty things, and does not drink any water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and therefore the treatment is that it should be endured for this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the abscess, which is, when it can be seen, similar to curved tongs with pointed fingers that enter the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	And take the shape of the beak of the patient, and it has roughness like a knife, so that whatever is taken, it cannot be released;
et vez ci la forme:	and cut in this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The medical practitioner's hand is useless
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many forms of abscesses are found, according to those who have seen them both here and there in this book, and they vary in perforation and size;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and this is in two ways, one of which is the same as itself, and due to moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second kind is for when they are inside or in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Because the abscesses of the head are different from those in the lower body, and the abscesses in the thigh bone are different from those that come into joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if there is no need to pierce an abscess until the bowel is completely dead according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if some of them require piercing while they are believed to be dead, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that occur between joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when an abscess comes from the joint, and it is left until it is putrid in that place, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Where the abscess is located near the main limb, and if you delay the perforation until it dies, it will harm the main limb.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	where the ground is weakened so that if you cut into it now it will die.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not fitting to cut an abscess where the ground has already been weakened for digestion, but rather when you are sure that the ground will collapse, because if you cut into it now it will burst open and a fistula will form.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot be cured in great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	and it is necessary to know the nature of the perforation of the abscess which dies according to its fulfillment, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the discharge of fever, and the diminishment of pain and redness, and the softening and sharpness of the chief of the abscess, and other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary to situate the puncture or further down from the abscess, and where it opens wounds;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the puncture is long in the body, and if the abscesses are near the hands or feet, or joints, or nerves, or arteries, so that they do not have a vein.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	When this part is swollen, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the groin, so that you value (value to leave) the perforation until it is confirmed to be completed digestion accomplished, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce in front of that, the body will swell with the venom from it, and is full of much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and in case they harden the lips and the innermost part of it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if an abscess is perforated according to the size of the body, according to that which the limbs have need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	and it is necessary to tie off small abscesses, small fistulas.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large fistulas, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	And if there are such abscesses or it is necessary to cover the wound, and bind.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become so swollen that one cannot wrap it, and is deflated, then it is necessary to do the same way as for the boils.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if some are cut into three parts, and some are cut as the wood of myrtle, just like abscesses from arrows.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if some are treated with a round cut, and other cuts, and similar cutting.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those without a head, like superficial abscesses, it is necessary to let them drain purely.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected a great quantity of pus, to let it drain, but not to extract all of it in one hour, but rather take only part of it.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	And then I have stopped up the abscess just yesterday, and then there was no discharge afterwards.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this gradually step by step, as much as necessary, until the bowel is whole.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Similarly, if the patient has weak virtue, or a woman in childbed, or small children, or elderly men who are decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	But the expectation is that it will not occur again at all with the outcome of the bowel, lest by chance the patient dies, and you do not take consolation.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Then avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have pierced the abscess, if it is a wound, and examine whether the wound of the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it's a flat suture, then insert tapes of linen or old cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it's big abscesses and there is much pus, then it is convenient that you put one tape in each so that they come together.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have struck a part of the abscess with your finger, and pulled it out, then it is advisable to fill it with old cotton or flannel cloth soaked in moisture, and tie it up just the next day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the bones and the healer of wounds until he is sound.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood comes out of the incision, sew it up with a moistened cloth and linen, and tie on over it repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the veins persist in bleeding, then he must attend to governance and care, and the powders that I have said are in your hands in this book, and if it is winter, and the veins or abscesses are very nervous, then it is advisable to put on tourniquets and moist cloths soaked in wine and hot oil;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in this state, and the abscess is charred, then it is advisable to put on moist cloths soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil cold, just the next day, as we have said;
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then cut the abscess and clean it up and treat it, as needed, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And therefore it is necessary to investigate universally in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Or, I said that you must look before treating an abscess, and here is the chapter.
des soros	The sorrows
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where small abscesses come from on the head, and are of various kinds, like in cloth, just as those from a piece of cloth, or similar to those from a mouse's skin, and there are many such.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are fatty areas and swellings where there is moisture just like in pus;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And there are swellings that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause harm.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the injuries of the groin are such that if you have found in all the instruments called "entremisoire", of which the shape comes after, what thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	Because if it contains moisture, they cut through with the long ones.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is empty, if it scorches and there is nothing left to spare the skin that contains the moisture, because it returns when you leave something.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	After plunging cotton into Egyptian ointment if it is present.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, then in water and in wool, apply the wound, and leave it until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And those who are left after the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then renew the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the wool, until you know that it will not stay for the night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with ointment suitable to it, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscesses do not burst out quickly, according to this form for a long time;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And I pull out your nails, and I scrape off all the skin, and put all your treatment for drawing blood to relieve the chest where it is.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the arteries cause you harm, do what I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And thus also do with the abscess if it is pained, and as you cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cutting on the painful abscess and the moisture, if it is lighter, because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if some of these abscesses or swellings have not been moistened and from those that I copied or swelled the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess in the same way as a stone hard, rough and white, which cannot be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one of them has been burned, it is also as well done a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming or swellings that come on the head of children and the roots of the ears, cut them so thoroughly for as long as possible before they reach a certain point, lest they burst.
et les cure si com il covient.	and let the treatment proceed as it should.
des scrophules	dead sores
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	often happen abscesses at the throat, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes appear elsewhere on the body, and are very painful, and join one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And every abscess is located within its own place, just as the wound and the abscess on the head, just as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and there are many similar abscesses.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and some that are malignant and will not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that one that you see has good disposition at the shoulder, and is similar to the color of the flesh, silent in all parts and not inflamed at any part or at the artery or vein, nor deeply penetrated.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	if it suits to copy it from above, and scrape off each part, and make the two lips pale like veins, if you have need of that, just as we said in incising on the head.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And then the nail is pulled out little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or vein, and do not scrape the scab or scratch with needles, lest your hands falter, and see too far ahead, that you may cover more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you touch the vein or artery, and that does not stop, then put vinegar on the wound to break it, or some powder that congeals blood, and bind the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and let it be so long until the abscess is calmed down and the wound is muffled, and begins to form pus.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the bleeding has stopped, return to your work, until you complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Now you wish to know if it will stay there without any small boils or sores, whether it will stop or continue.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if it has a large vein at the root of the boil, so that you will not want to only cut off that boil in its root, but bind with a strong double thread and let it fall down without any trouble;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then apply a dressing made of wool cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment and then treat the wound.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you strike the scrofula, it is necessary to assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, for there will be no more swelling because of the great size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if it is necessary that you understand to cut at the root of the thing, and apply force, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those boils that have a tendency to burst open, cut into one where it is swollen.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and cut into it as was previously said, depending on the place, and then dress with linen cloth and similar things, so that it does not spread any further decay of what remains.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well cleaned, then the treatment of binding with cloth until it heals.
de squinance	of suspicion
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	They also told and spoke about cutting the throat.
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have strangulated, it is advisable that the cut of the throat called "epiglottis" be avoided.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And do not provide help to those who have cut themselves in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in a state of purging, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to escape the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it below three circles or four, one small cut through the middle, between the two circles or according to the size of the cut from the surface, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those who are so sick are very convenient for the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the masters are fearful, it is advisable to extend the skin of the throat to the entire neck, then make a cut in the flesh until it comes to the cartilage.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut into the sac, just as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is shown by the section of the throat of the cartilage which comes out through the neck where the law has been broken, and by the failure of the voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave a scar over the wound.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour is past because of which we doubt strangulation, assemble both lips of the wounded place with a thread that is whole and soul to the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines that make flesh swell until it becomes healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	But do not perform this operation until the throat is entirely stuffed and the patient is judged to be on the verge of death and has begun to fail.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	And thus you must tie the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and so it is kept from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And because the ancients ordered to leave the wound open until the illness has passed, and it passes in three days or four, then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young girl took out a knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut off part of the neck hairs.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to cure her, and found her also dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found out that blood had come out of it, and I knew well that she hadn’t cut into a vein or carried it to her neck, but that the veins had burst out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I regretted it, and sewed the wound, and cured her until she was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and it happened to the girl that her voice became hoarse, and she returned to her normal state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because of which I thought that there was no fear in the opening of the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called a "gallstones hernia" and it's a large abscess in the color of blackberry, and it's more common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	And occurs in two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	Natural and accidental.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or natural has no engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two manners: for one is similar to swelling and the other similar to an abscess that comes from an artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it is not suitable to apply fire over the fever for one who is small, and he proves and searches at all the interior;
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as similar to swelling, and there is no pain, if you strike it, just like we strike the nail, and take out its entire core, if there is none.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and thoroughly search for all, and let the doctor do it as he knows how, until he is completely well.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of suffering that I will list all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and one must know whether to tell everything, what is the difference between death and discharge.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that discharge is when the fever and boils persist, until the fever has passed and the purulence is complete.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then follows the fever and the cold.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	But with death, there is no cold or fever, nor pain, and it contains its own gallbladder, which is its own sack, and according to the color of the body, and begins like a jelly, and becomes large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And there are so many appearances, or swellings, or moisture, and much of a color as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of one not known, that you examine and inquire first at all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", according as its form comes or to chapter who follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is to take a piece of damp tissue that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers one by one, until you know when the humors have pierced the vein, then only according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then remove the middle part, and be careful that it will not burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the abscess bursts in the groin area, cut it according to its color as I said for other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if there is no moisture after the middle part, see if it is greasy, then cut with a cross, and take out with pincers, and lightly scrape it from each part, and cover the spot where you are treating it so that it heals sound with the wound.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot treat it properly, then cut it by pieces so it does not stay there.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	But if it stays there, it will come back many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	But if it stays for a little while and causes no harm, apply the wound with some corrosive powders, hold it tight, and put on soothing ointments and other remedies until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	But if the wound is large, cut off both sides of the wound, and treat the person who has suffered a stroke.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	And if the veins are swollen against this remedy or another, quickly apply the new vitriol splinter, and let it be left for two days or three, until the wound is clean, and allows the blood to settle.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Now the head of the shoulder returns to its place when it has been left for a while without anything.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Now consider the forms of internal swellings, and they are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	large and small, and little.
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and in it there are three quarters, which are called "albares", and one that is called "breb", and they are of three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, small, and little, to enclose the sinuses of a fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and are just like the nails used to cut splinters, and are made of citron wood, iron, or silver, and they are very useful for those who are yellow, and are more advisable for putting stop to the black pus that fills a fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	And there are three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	big, medium, and small, according to the size of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of ulcers are very similar, just as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	big, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if ulcers have two lobes of the three kinds also.
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if ulcers have three lobes, and are each of the three kinds.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if ulcers have two lobes, one lobe only, and are each of the three kinds.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And all these are necessary in their own place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these cuts is made, and it is such that from one side only you cut, so that you burn the nose, because of that one does not pierce the vein or the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these intestinal issues are the symptoms returned in handkerchiefs, so that the patient does not experience anything at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and they come from three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	great, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and you should not cut in only one place, but rather like the joints, such as knees, arms, and breast, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes you make another small instrument, resembling burnt fistulas, according to this shape, because it stains blood;
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put him on no occasion by the healthy person who has coped with veins, and arteries, and never again in that great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never are the nipples of any man swollen when they begin to rot, until they look like a woman's.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and keep them swollen and inflamed, and whoever wishes to treat them, if it is believed that the treatment should follow this shape along this line from b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrapes the fat, and applies the wound with medicine coated in charcoal, then brings together the two lips of the wound at the seam, and cures until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the nipple turns inward and is swollen as in women, so that it forms two swellings above, then makes two cuts.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one is held to the other at its end, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from line b until line g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the cautery, instruct the patient to scorch the skin between the two lips, and extract the fat, and apply what we have said about costume and powder, and what is necessary in the treatment, until he is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if he is not healed, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the drying of blood, then it is advisable to fill the wound with wet cotton cloth in a corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let him sit so that the remaining part and the fat are drawn out, then treat him until he is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses of the joints.
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from under the joints are hard swellings or have ribs, and if there is moisture in them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore those that contain moisture must be closed according to this shape, from the line .b. up to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowel that is in the abscess is empty, apply the wound with old cotton, and let it rest until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment suitable for that until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are like swellings of scrofula, do it as we have said in cutting open scrofula wounds, and if the wound has a bowel, apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the cauterization of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the veins are cut, and the skin is sewn over it, which often brings forth abscesses, and just as it happens with the vein exposed and an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if it is swollen in the same way as when it is through an artery, because the abscesses are long within;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and if you feel it with your two hands, you will find strangulation;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is due to the vein, it appears as if there are red scars;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is madness to cover up this abscess, and itself when it is under the bones and joints and near the chest, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to abandon the iron treatment, and those with a head injury should also abandon it, and in those who swell from an artery, let them cut through the skin long.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then cover the armpit area with linen, and cut off beautifully the artery of the arm, until it is discovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then take off the linen and pierce with a needle at just that spot on the other side, and constrict the artery with a thread twice as thick as two fingers, as I have taught you in the extraction of both arteries found in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then tie the patient who is between the two threads of a ligature so that there is no gap, and remove the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply pressure to stop the bleeding, until the wound stops.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat these wounds so that they heal completely;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is for the size of the vein, then it's fitting that you dye your hand with the color of the wound so that you can apply the stain to all the skin, then pour the needle under the part you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and make a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then tie the stain, just as I told you, or tying of one part of two threads of the thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the threads won't set in, then pour another needle over all the thread under the entire stain at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut the abscess until it stops bleeding, then cut off the excess skin and leave what's tied.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put it on my drapery moistened with wine and oil, then apply treatments of poultices and bandages until he is cured.
des apostemes des ners	From the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	When an abscess comes from the artery and vein, it comes to the nerves when they are dried up, or due to excessive work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often in the joints and in the bones where there are wounds, and it's like an abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and there is more disposition to die from pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one is stretched to the point of pain, the patient feels pain, and it's not just in the wound, but under the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and he is mute from all parts, and cannot go forward or backward, neither above nor below, and one who has dislocations should not cover them with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	perhaps he will experience contractions;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and they who are on the head or on the forehead, do the skin at the spatulate.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If there is an abscess that is small, if you have nail clippers, and cut at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if the surgeon takes out the tumor and scrapes it, then he fixes the wound to the ribcage, and continues the treatment until the patient is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of great boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Never does it happen in the belly and not in any other place, for it is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to fungus, with subtle roots, and large thorns;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and in it are both small and large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	In the house where there was one woman who had two swellings in her belly which were more like fungus than any other thing, and she didn't have a difference between them, they were white, and had small roots, and had split open, and decayed with moist air.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I copied them and found that one weighed 18 ounces, and the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is such that you look to see if the patient has moist wounds, and the color of the armpit is white and moist, with a fine root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If you cut it with a large spoon or spatula, and it is in your sight, the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For when cutting comes the many great hemorrhages of blood, and if you do not watch yourself, then hasten therefore to the cautery.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient with fear and anxiety at the incision of iron, if you take a long and well-made thread, and bind the arm so as we have said, and let him rest for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain it tightly, and do not cease to tighten the long thread until the arm stops hurting and feels better by touch;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, and there's fear of cutting into the same place on the abdomen, but you must cut half of it, then cauterize so it does not return;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then treat the wound, and keep in mind that you should not cut into the red tissue which is of fresh color and has poor sensation and runs with milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	This is an enchantment of an abscess, and I have come to this cure for the chancre after.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil exists.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of a wound comes from cautery of a cut or incision on the scalp, and is in the abdomen with some swellings as in other cases, or from blood that cuts through veins or arteries according to what is in front, or from windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is by scalp incision and from the intestine's issue, since the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing with pain, and opens to various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the outcome of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press on both sides so that it returns, and then comes back, and by chance it gets scarred, and becomes much larger at the entrance to the bath and for great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it's because of moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it's because of blood, it opens by these signs the big and hard abscesses, and are stuck in a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it's due to weakness, then it's soft at the elbow, and if the wound is examined to see if its appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or the vein, or weakness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it suits you to leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the gallbladder, it is advisable that you instruct the patient to tie his groin and be stretched out straight, then stitch everything around the wound.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then instruct to sit sovereignly between your hands, then go around the patient that you have stitched all over the stomach area, and then stitch half of the abscess on top with great care.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie around with a strong thread or a cord of very strong silk tightly, and make sure it is fastened well on both ends.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then open up half of the abscess and extend it on the ligature, and pour into your wound the intestines;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught on the ligature, pull it loose, and pour the intestines into the outside of the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the bowel, pull it out on the onechene and cut off its surplus.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the arteries cause counteraction, or the vein, then go smoothly into them, and return to your work and take two needles, and pour two thick threads, and pour the two needles back in the place where you made the puncture.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then strain the abscess in four fingers above the needles, and if you see it, pull out the needles, and leave it to him as long as he suffers, and cut the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	When you strike at it when it is subtle and bloody, then the surgeon does what is required, and he cuts open the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract the blood or moisture you find, then treat the patient with what is needed, and bind the limb.
dou chancre	dough chancere
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division regarding the symptoms of a chancre, and how to treat it with medicine, and how to avoid using iron treatment;
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And the chancre spreads to the groin, and great care must be taken in its treatment, and the ancients said that when a chancre appears on the person or can be removed like one in the testicles, or in the groin, or in similar places, and it should be completely removed as soon as it appears at the beginning;
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when it is great and old, so do not approach it, for I have never seen any of the sick.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	I have never seen anyone cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the abscesses, when it is in its place or can be removed, as we have said, are that you never purify the sick person of black bile.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make him healthy if he has shown signs of excess, then cut the abscess.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then throw away your ulcers or cankers, and cut off the head from all parts, and remove the bone from all parts with nothing left.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow out completely, and hope well with your hand or with something, but if they begin to bleed again from the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize so that the skin is not washed.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the patient of another treatment until he becomes sound.
de ydropisie	From dropsy, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	As we have said in the division, the signs of dropsy and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each one, and the cure that is done with medicine, and also that which is cured by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if only it is blistered;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and iron should not be touched in these two similarities:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympanites and yperochia, because it is a mortal thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore when you give medicine for this similarity of dropsy called "blistering" and the cure does not work, then look at if the patient is weak or if he has another disease than dropsy, such as stomach troubles and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If it has not been touched with iron, because there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see a patient of great virtue, and he has only dropsy, but is not too thin or too tall, then so treat him:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	lift the patient upright over your hands, and have the attendants press his belly down to the lowest part of his stomach, then take the thorny spatula in that form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And so are the rules of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	with a point, and make sure it's not too deeply inserted so that it can come out at the intestine when you throw it in, and do not squeeze.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look to see if the dropsy is tied down towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	If you must break open (open) in such a place, since it is a third tooth, you must cut downwards from under the jaw.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropiness is due to liver disease, then if you cut to the left of the third tooth;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is due to mucous, then if you cut to the right, and do not allow the patient's blood to flow onto the wound that superfluous humors run towards the weak part of him;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and the point, and lift your hand to all the spatumile between the skin and the sac as if you were scraping it out with the quantity of an fingernail or two.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the sac until the spatumile comes to its natural place, and that is the liver, then take out the point, and use this instrument which has this form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is like a silver chain, so fine and subtle, and made of iron or anvil light, and in the lower part there are small holes.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on the other side, three holes.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	And two on one side, and one on the other.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And the knives are cut like a pen, and it is the shape of the incision that scribes write on the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the top of which is the hinge, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it now turns upwards on the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	then it is cleared half or two-thirds, for if you clear more than it is fitting in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the solution of his spirit with the arm, or he will let out hands, or he draws near to death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but when it is clear according to the amount of his virtue, and according to what the disposition of the virtue tells us about the patient's feet;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then take the instrument and hold the water, and now it is held in place by the dressing which stops up the puncture that is on the sac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then take up the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and take a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this on another day, and be careful not to fool around until it doesn't last but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	and if you doubt the patient, and take a lot of water, if the treatment is to the dust or cold stone, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and they drink a lot.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and instruct the healer to dry out the patient with medicinal desiccatives until they are healthy, and cautery on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the swelling of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	There is never an infant born without any swelling in the penis, or if there is swelling, it is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it seems that soon they will pierce at all the sensitive places, very subtle and according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put or pierce with a subtil (small) bone of a plonc ( probably a type of fish), and tie it up thus for three days or four, when he wants to make urine, if the stitches are made loose, then make urine again, and then put them back.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and in case it does not come out at all, because the urine that comes is not the one he left closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the opening is in his foot, then put on a tunic made of thin cloth, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the piercing in their own place are sick, because no one is born with a piercing at the head of the penis, so that they cannot urinate before they lift their penis up.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot move for this reason because the material cannot come to that place, and it is a bad sickness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the work is that the patient lies on his back, put there is a point from the head of the rod and it strikes just as long as the space of a grain of millet, so that the puncture occurs in the middle, as it should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and keep away from the consequence of blood that comes often, and if it has happened, so that the stain that causes the bleeding stops, and treat the wound until it is clean.
des pustules de la verge	from pimple of the prick
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Often come cysts on the rod, and it is a bad appearance.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are malignant and non-malignant ones.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	If it is necessary that you grasp them at the base one by one, and strike and crush all, then put on cotton moistened in Egyptian balm.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the ointment again and again until it is made pure.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the bath is malignant, of a foul odor and stench, it is fitting that you should apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you strike them and the fat is in the wound, if it has both inside the skin and outside, if necessary, you should remove the fat that is within first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is soldered, remove it.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	Because when you treat the whole area together, if you don't take care to secure the joint of the vein so it is not perceived, and pus and corruption come into the vein and on the spot.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	if it is necessary to shave all that which is black and rotten, then tie up the emplaster of honey and flour which shall be made from the rind of greengage plums and walnuts, then cure other cures until he is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if they bleed from the wound comes, so apply lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The fire cautery is beneficial in both the assembly of limbs.
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	this means, at the decomposition and corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the joints of the finger are corrupted and contracted, if it is necessary to put or apply a bandage around the finger made from wood, and let the patient urinate among them;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the hair grows again to the head of the finger where it has become infected or for an abscess, if it is necessary then that you burn it with a scalp instrument until the ties are loosened, and deliver the joints of the finger from all parts;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	And if this is a grievous thing to consider, then it is proper that you burn at the spot on the head of the spine with a thorny staff and some poultice.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then serve it well between the second and first joint, with some linen thread moistened with cold water, so that it adheres to the bone.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is no less of a concern for continued bleeding as other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	It is good to take care when we perform this work of our own will, and especially in children, for it is proper that the one who makes them should do the best and most gentle work for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	They did not say that circumcision was done for their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	Because I have sought the greatest part of the masters and physicians who performed circumcisions around the umbilicus, and with force, and for all those who are weak.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If it is swollen because of the knife because he has two boils, and by chance if one pricks those above and doesn't move until they grow.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or the wound covers again, and there is double pain, and with the rubbing that does not remove the doubt about the sharpness of the point of the member;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and with the rubbing of the ulcer by chance the iron escapes, and it runs over, and many times this happens as if they need further rubbing and I have tried it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the purification which is made with force, all along the whole tendon of thread I have found the good fortune of the experiment, because the forces cut exactly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, the fingers become equal in length in all things;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the hair is well straightened inside the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and if the manner of the first operation is that you make think the child, if it understands, to do only tie the thread around the stick so only, and then make joy in all the ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then make it straight with your hands, and set back the strength between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the limbs.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then dip your hand in the horn and breathe upon it, and hold it up so that the joints of the horn are uncovered;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then clean it well of the dirt that is assembled upon it, then tie it with a new linen strip doubled twice, and tie it under one thread to another thread;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	And tie it tightly with two threads on the second hand to the bag and the tube, then sew between the two threads, and lift the wound hastily and take off the head of the horn;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	Then let the blood flow slowly, for it is the mother.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on it and above the powder I made glue from a half-moon of fat cooked until it is still warm with rose water, congealed with good olive oil and fresh, and let him lie on it for another day, and the doctor will treat him again till he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of forces at mortification if it is this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The two shoulders shall be joined together and tied up tight; and the shoulders should be as large as the right arm.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the fault in the cleansing of the wound occurs when the knees within are pierced by the incision.
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	then you should extend it to your angle, so that the wound is opened.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold to your angle, take the nail and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	and if they stay for three days and that which is under the girdle is swollen, let it be left until the wound is cauterized lightly.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	if you cut as you move, and keep away from the girdle part, it will do no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Cure then the joints of those who have sudden pains from powder, as we have said when treating powders, and if they strike too much beyond measure, and it goes up, so it does not harm anything.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure him, as we have said, until he is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	When retention of urine occurs
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to the stone, or blood clotting, or phlegm, or gall, or similar things that we have discussed in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not flowing, and you see that there is retention due to a stone that is lodged near the neck of the bladder, then it is convenient for the patient to sit on his heels;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and place the stone on his back, and extend his belly from above his back, and restrain the patient as much as he can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And therefore it is constrained to pull the joints of the bladder towards the expression of the stone above, because the urine is loosened.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if she does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so it is necessary to administer an extraction for all the instrument called 'siringue', because of which there is a swelling:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it should be made of fine and light silver wire, like a bird's feather;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and the size of half a palm and half an inch, and be fine at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the way to extract urine if you take a single thread, and tie a small piece of wool or cotton at the head, and pour the head into the siringue;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	Let the excess moisture of the linen be coped and the balm applied to the head of the siringue, then oint the siringue with oil or butter and with mallow and wine, and sit the patient on the chair, and make him lie down the belly and the verge of oil moist and oil of olive and water tede;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then lay the siringue slightly in the verge, until it comes to the root of the verge, then double the verge upward over the wound;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	then pour a balm on the siringue before it reaches the belly, and the patient feels it coming up to the empty place, for that is not done according to this order because of the direction in which it is going is twisted;
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then let it stand for a little while, and the thread will come out to every strand of hair, and the urine will follow the urine, then pull it forth, and make the urine run.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and begin again with the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and set right the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	Of urinary afflictions
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorching or pus is in the bladder, or when putridness is assembled there, and you see blood and medicines distilling out, do this to all the equipment called "clepsedre", and it's the form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	This one is closed, and if it's three perforations,
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the leaden pins because the medication is cold, so that it may warm up well in the penis, if we can put an application on the moisture, and push when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see that your medicine is in the bladder, put on the head of caustic in the moisture, and pull out as far as it will go.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you touch the moisture to the healer, and then tightly close the wound;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If the moisture enters in, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of a subtle cyst, which is what we call a bladder stone:
si est ci:	if it is there:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And if it is made of silver or lead, and the joints are higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below at the spot where the ligaments burst;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture that you see used to treat the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a good double thread, and heat the bladder with this warm moisture on the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Now the head of the shoulder into the fistula, then strain your hand on the bladder until all moisture has arrived at the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle around it and pierce it all around.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then tie the thread tightly through these perforations, then assemble the circle as you would the nail and put within it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and attach to the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do it in the same way as you did with the bladder of your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	From the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stones and the extraction of assemblies of medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And I said the difference between a stone in its socket with water, and all signs, is that one which should be cut.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the phallus;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	And I will tell you about it explicitly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone stuck in the bladder often occurs in children, and it is a sign that the water has escaped from the bladder like water escaping into its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and I have shown them, and the ailing ones complain about their phallus, and they often pierce it many times, and then inflame.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and because of these frequent attacks the foundations are worn out;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and it is light in children until they are four years old, and is very much grieved in the elderly, and is at a middle stage between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and it is the easier cure for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with catheter, in order to clean all the filth which is inside the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	But there is no use when it comes to cutting the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the hands and stretch and move down below, so that the stone descends into the bladder to the bottom, and does not fall back up into him.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his knees, so that the bladder is entirely sloping downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	and then touch it inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel a stone in space, then get up now to cut on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it doesn't come out at the toucher (the spot where you cut), so that all is moist with the oil of your left hand, then let the patient be ill, or to his right side, if he is an old man.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	And set the bow in its foundation, and choose the stone, and when you feel it on your left side, if it is thin at the base of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press on to your left side, and set the bow at the door where you will be cutting.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and he orders him to stretch out his right hand to the top of the fingers, and his left hand to remove the leather below the fingers in the place where one makes the cut;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then I pour the salt mixture onto him, because this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And they put it between the joints and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the left knee;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and it should be straight above the stone, and its two ends at the foundation, and if the passage is too wide due to its size, and inside it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	in case the pressure from the two ends that are at the foundation causes it to break or shatter.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and search where there is part of the stone with angles and margins;
si est griés a issir;	if it is stuck to come out.
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And if there is an ulcer at its root, appearing like a splinter, and resonating, from which comes light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	Therefore if it has angles and borders, make the incision larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	And if it does not heal, if it is fitting that you strain the nails which are like a file on the head, to press and squeeze the stone so it will not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you pour in a small instrument curved at the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot put it in that way, expand the puncture so that the pus comes out, and if the nerves are not cut open, squeeze it with vinegar.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are more stones, pour in the largest one into the neck of the bladder first, then cut it up, and the small ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or he dies, or his urine comes back through because of that which his bowels cannot hold.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but one should exert oneself to treat, or to debilitate with nails, until you treat it by pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood and strain it, and bind with wet cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and red rose water and cold water to cool down the swelling.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then revive the patient on his neck, and do not unbind the bandage until at least three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release it, so that the joints are freed from their pain and evil, apply a great amount of oil and water to the healing place, then apply the ointment of infallible and the ointment of basilicon until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And when an abscessed foot comes to the wound and corrosion, and freezing of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this, the urine, which is known in a certain manner without falling with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	But therefore cut the vein in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, the bladder will corrupt, and it will rot.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound with water and bandages and cloth, and help him in all the ways you know, until he is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	It is convenient that all the remedies you cure him with, you tie the two knees and assemble the medicines on his body.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small and it is embedded in the bone, and the urine cannot come out;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the cure of what I say is so that you cut your tail, then you are excused from cutting for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tried this way.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron according to this shape and fix three nails into the one bone.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and tie around the vein next to the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then pour in the forest (blood) gently into the vein, until it comes to the stone.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	And turn the forest (blood) in your hand towards the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If blood comes forth soon, then press your hand upon the thing that is left behind of the stone which is inside the vein.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it breaks forth soon and comes out with the urine, and is healed, then the patient will be cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do that for any reason which prevents it, then tie the foot below the knee and the other above, then make the stick straight between the two joints, then pull forward, and release the joint, and clean the wound with ice that is in the injury;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let him remain as long as he is cured.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone in women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	There is little chance that a stone will be embedded in a woman, and if it has happened once, the treatment is painful and is forbidden for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman knowledgeable about how to remove stones, especially when she is cast away.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art with her hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth manner is that the femur of a woman is deeper than that of a man, because it can be made to have a deeper shape, and great fear there is. And if necessary, you should seek out a midwife well-versed in this art; at any cost, find one true, and if you do not find her, then use some subtle trick.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and presents a well-known woman skilled in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of this art, and commands that she do what you command regarding the cutting of the femur.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and examine her very well to see if she is a virgin;
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	And then he must put his hand on something firm, and look for the stone.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And if it is true, then he must press the arm with his left hand against the belly wall.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	And if it is true, then he should move it from hard to hard, starting at the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh, against the midpoint of the bone, where it has been moved and feels the stone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	And do not move his hand above or below the stone, and let it be fixed at the first small mark.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	Now put the bone in its place in the belly, if you feel a stone very close to the wound so that the stone can come out fully, and find out what many kinds of stones are:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	This is to know that there are small and great stones, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those with holes.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the similarities to determine the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if they do not contain poison, then apply vinegar to the wound and hold it for an hour until it is stained.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work until the stone comes out, and have the purulent substances which I told you in the extraction of stones to help you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if they do not contain poison, and it is the artery that has been cut, apply powder on the wound and put the purulent substance of lentils and bendels, and do not start again with this, and leave the stone alone, lest the patient die by chance.
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the wound is calmed and the pain is overcome, so that you return to your work, until the joint is restored.
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia in the groin.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	The rince water is nothing other than the assembly of moisture or white phlegm, which is below the level of the joints, that contains the blood.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and is called "phlegm", and it is never properly in the blood itself, if one thinks that this is another blood.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it's the skin of the joint between the white phlegm that we have said.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	This does not happen.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this mucus is weak that it comes to the joints, and spreads out that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And at times if comes by percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it's yellowish decline, or without red, or black, or white waters, and this happens more;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	For it is the sign of knowing this assembly, for when it is white and swollen as we have said, if there are abscesses that form, it looks like an egg, and does not open because of moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own skin, there are abscesses that form with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks it's another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the joint and the swollen part, it feels warm.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you see the color of the moisture, it confirms that the swelling is at the inner quarter circle, and so the form is as expected.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Then according to what comes after the surrounding area, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cut with iron, it is fitting that the patient be made healthy according to our skill and the fullness of their body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	Then let the swine lie on his back, on a thing one foot high, and put many folds of cloth on him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	Then have him lie on his left side, and instruct the minister to have him lie on his right, and stretch the stick towards one of the two ribs near the breast;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula and cut the skin of the breast from his long line to the joint, and make a straight cut through, dividing the skin just so it is white as snow, and scrape off thinly according to one's power;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the white spot flat with water from the great puncture, and extract all the water, and then put on your bandages, and stretch the white spot upwards;
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	And do not touch the heart of the joints, but only the surface alone.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Cut or cut him entirely as well as you can himself, for if you do not cut it correctly, he will return to the illness.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the ulcer bursts forth at your work, then remove it to its place when you have completed the operation on the surface.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then join the two joints at the heart of the joints with a bandage, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the ulcer corrupted by another disease, it is wise to tie up those suspensory bands, doubting the progression of the bleeding.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the crown at all the surrounding skin, and extract the blood, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if an abscess is assembled in two parts together, saying that these are two foci;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if cut the other part just like you did on the first one equally, then clean the blood and put linen moistened in rose oil on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another linen moistened in wine and oil over it, and on top of the two wounds, and cover them with double clothed dresses, and tie it up above all according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take the two cloths and fill them with wool fluff according to this resemblance and assemble them by sewing in the neckline of the braies, and one of the shoulders takes hold on the foundation just as high as the back, and the other at the part of the nail;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	And the other two joints on either side of the heart, are all tightened together in a knot of the arm.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And at no time is medicine applied with the cautery of fire in place of iron, and then you must grasp a subtle cauterizing instrument, and strike the skin of the joints, and it should be heated as we have said, so that the white sac which contains the liquid is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cautery in this form, and pierce that sac at the joints, and scorch it with this subtle cauterizing heat:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And strike him in all the ways you can, until you have scorched him thoroughly;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and keep so that the fire does not touch the eye;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	And therefore knows that this work is more safe;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and must keep watch against the occurrence of bleeding, and women must be careful with the work of amputation;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if no other thing contradicts you, or an abscess occurs, or bleeding or any other thing, then cure what is contrary according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and will not endure this work because of its horror, then perforate him as I have said, and when you are certain by the meanings we have explained that water is laid into a wound, then place the patient on the raised seat.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess at the lower part and as far in as the entire surface of the limb is wide, and make the perforation all along the long length of the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And if they are large wounds, so that all of the fluid flows out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton over the wound, tie it tight, and let the remaining fluid drain off, then cure until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white linen cloth does not allow the fluid to escape from the wound in the mouth of the wound, then it is wise to insert a quill or the instrument used to treat the swelling, for this form should be as before;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarge the wound, and see that the fluid returns, and is assembled again after six months or more, in which time it will be as before, and so the patient's days will pass;
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses on the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	see that in the cutting of this branch there is great fear of more deaths, because it seems to me that one should not cut;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the wound and its symptoms.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	Therefore, most wounds come from the body, and similarly have veins.
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it's because of a lot of cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	which is known to be through excessive acidity and sharpness, which spreads in the veins, or by percussion.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and is the color of the wound according to the color of the body.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	does not bring pain, and is a painful wound.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes is a painful wound with purulent and bloody color, and at no time comes from another artery, or swelling of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is through no artery, so is seen by the shape of the abscess, when you press on your two fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and do not touch anything else.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is swollen with blood is known by its shape at the expression of gentle pressure on the two fingers, and it can be easily felt above this appearance, and above other swellings;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And so you hit the thinnest part of the vein, then pierce the top, and pull forward the flesh, and deliver the suspension from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the vein is already swollen with these swellings, then it is necessary that you treat the vein and hit it;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is in the sac or inside the vessels, so that you can deliver all that place and return smoothly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the hair of the arm is at their backside, it is fitting that you copy it all and extract the pus, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are completed, apply the wound of woolen cloth in oil rose and wine, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses on the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess that has been enveloped and wrapped around like a calf's udder, with the softening of the tissues, and the patient suffers greatly when it ruptures.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment for this disease is just as painful as that which was before, and we will tell you about it, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You must place the patient on the raised table, then pour the liquid of the vessels down to your knees, and all the surrounding flesh you will stretch out, and spread it apart.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut with the scalpel deeply through both sides of the wound, until they are exposed, and then clean each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then prick an arrow or place a double thread at the place where the vein has come out, and tie it to the first limb above, and tie it closely under the other limb;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut in the middle straight on, according to the length of the body, and pull out the corrupted moistures;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound just as with others, or burn with arrows, so that no vein comes to flow;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	because through this no harm comes, and the veins come to all of them, so it is fitting to treat the vessels for all of them;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the blood does not stop flowing because of the incision on the vessels, and dries up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	From the operation of the scalp
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The venous distention of this type occurs by the cutting that comes out through the suture, or the extension on the abdomen in the region of the kidneys, because the intestines descend from that incision to one of the veins.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this incision is either on the suture, or from the extension of it, and these two manners come about from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from percussion, or a fall, or a burn, or the lifting of pain, and by similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is an extension of the suture, are that there are little by little, in long time, and do not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and it is the abscesses equal to its place up to the point where the syphilitic advances the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it's from the scalp section, that it brings sudden pain at its beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, under the skin close to the bone, and this is because of the intestine's movement and the body's avoidance of the scalp incision.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes he ties the intestines around it, and is retained in that place, causing great suffering to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And for iron cautery, because of fear, he would rather shun it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way of opening the abscess is that you instruct the patient to insert his hand into the intestine at the wound, if it can be returned.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then sit upon your navel between my hands and lift up the testicles;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then press the heart upward, and cut through all the skin of the joints until long.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then pour into the belly of the navel a string according to what you have need for to open the wound, and so that they can be pulled out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scorch the syphilis that is under the skin of the joints until the white syphilis becomes visible from all parts;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then pour your thumb index into that place which indicates the joint, in that place which is between the white shoulder blade and under the skin of the elbow, and between the second shoulder blade, and from that which is behind the elbow, and between the second shoulder blade;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And then move your right hand inside the joint, and let the white shoulder blade be above your left hand, lift the elbow to all the shoulder blades towards the chest;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And instruct the minister to extend the elbow upwards, and release that which is above behind the knot;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And ask your two to see if there is any intestine protruding or white shoulder blade inside, and if you find nothing, then blow into the belly under;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle or one with a big thread made of X threads, and the bottle in the back part near the flesh.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After the incision, then cut the hairs that appear with threads, until there are IV threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then gather them together in a cross shape, and bind the flesh where we have said is underneath the skin of the joints with a strong cord of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the hairs with threads, and tie them in two parts, so that not even a single servant or person who is fed on them can enter inside, lest there be an abscess.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the tying in that place according to the first tie long two parts of that one, and then after these two ties leave some flesh underneath the skin of the joints large as two fingers.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all the rest according to the circular path that the blood carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then strike in the part that is beneath the skin of the joints, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply moist linen in oil, and put it on the wound, and apply the bandage as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes cauterize the white flesh sac that we have said to be done after incising, by doubt of the slowing down of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and let the bandage stay on him;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it lingers at the chamber, then arise from hot water and put on as we have said, until he is cured;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another remedy until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia in the groin.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this chapter I have never seen anyone who dared to do the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And they say it is done in the manner of a twig which is gathered with the nail, in this way that you tie up the straps, after the head above less loosely on the lower part;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	and then cut inside the wound, and cleanse the abscess until the straps cry;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat him as we have said, until he is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	But sometimes comes rupture of an artery, as we have said, and opens the vessels;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and does not draw out anything from the intestines to the arteries, and if he draws something out, it is little, and repeats every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and if it remains too long in that point, so he believes the wound or a spleen, until the intestines draw it out;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens by the extension of the flesh through the anger, just as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened, and inflamed the veins and open.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the cure is by cautery, just as we have said before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and there is a cure in this way with iron.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and the patient swells under his back between your hands, then cut the inflamed area with a sharp knife according to the quantity of three dollars;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the flesh that is under the skin, and take it (the wound) and put it on the visible flesh.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it to the bottom of the belly, then sew the two visible wounds on the flesh under the wound above the head with a needle and sew both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Now take out the head of the right (shoulder) and do not cover the wound or extend the arm or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment for the removal of hair from the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then the cure by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you strike the hairs, if they bleed and heal the wound, so long as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphilitic is constrained, and has no appearance in the routine, and the cautery is more moist in this location, and closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin on the joints.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Sometimes the hair of the groin in some men is made soft because those hairs are softened, and it can be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is best when you want to cure him, that you have the patient lie on his back, and he strikes the soft hair on the natural hair.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then bring the two lips together to a suture, and if you see it, sew first the surface of the soft hair three times or four firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	When the cuts between the ribs are opened, and the treatment is done as with other wounds, until he is cured, and the wound is closed with thread.
dou chastrement	doubtful pain
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Since certain armor is prohibited by law, and that is why I do not wish to discuss it in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and are necessary for only two purposes:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one is that the mirror will be able to tell us how to answer when one is asked, and in order to know the cure;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other is because we have often had to do armoring of certain beasts in order to help ourselves, as with oxen and sheep and cattle and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that armor is done according to two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	Out of attraction, or out of cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one we make by attraction, we sit them in hot water best, until the joints are softened and for as long as.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then press them with your hand, until they are set and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	On the operation of amputation:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is fitting that you tie the best bandage, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then secure the suspension, and cut off each one as you have well washed.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave no small space on the surface that is under the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of cauterization is more painful than that which is done by attraction, because at the attraction sometimes something from the wounds remains, because of which the beast desires luxury;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	regarding those with both sexes
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	there are two kinds of hermaphroditism, according to two types of bodies:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one is that between the two sexes are open like the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes its urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another manner is in women, and it has on the nail as if a finger, and two wounds.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of the male and female conditions is that you copy the joined limbs in all, and the treatment as if it were other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second manner, of men whose urine leaps out from the skin, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tooth.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	The part of the tenticle is stuck to the natural place, so long as it is too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have it too much with one hand, and that's the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary to dye the surplus of the tenticle with your hand or on one side, and cut lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not go too far in the wound, lest blood comes and stains it, then the cure will need another cure until they are sane.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and to another charm that is born at the mouth of the mare's womb, and the navel, and by chance it will come forth, and they call it according to its resemblance like a cow, and for this they called it "the cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it must be copied, as we have said about the testicle, and the treatment until it is healthy.
de erratique	of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Misjudgment occurs when the nature of a woman is not recognized, or the loss is sought.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	And it comes from her natural birth or accident by illness that has happened to her.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	Or it comes from a collision of bone, or by subtle or deep dislocation, and is made inside the marrow, on the ribs, on the side, or in any other place;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and prevents conception and childbirth, and by chance may also prevent flowers from growing.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	And knowledge of this is acquired through the reflection of a fall.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If there are recent symptoms that appear, then either in your right side or left side.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is a subtle dislocation and the joint is near the two fingers, make haste to treat it accordingly.
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Put your two hands together, and let the woman lie on her back, with her legs spread out.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then let the two fingers form a circle, until the subtleties are rinsed and the sponges are saturated.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool and the mucus in oil, and put it on the wound, and have the woman rest at home every day, so that it will not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syfach is hard and dense, it is fitting that you cut with the spatula like a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the sponges are made of charcoal, then remove them after an hour and again after a day.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And apply the medicinal salves, if you like, such as saffron blood, dragon's blood, incense, and many other unguents.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	After a cauldron of fire is brought to a boil, so that the wound cannot be closed;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and then they let it dry for a long time, and they place a linen tent on it.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat other remedies until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh comes a hare, then they should cover it according to this manner, if it is not an enchanted spell.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the apostles that are in the marsh are not to be touched with fire.
des emorroides	wounds from hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Emorrhoids are openings of veins that occur without any condition, and when old hemorrhoids form, they become tumors.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And as we have previously discussed in the division the symptoms of oars and signs, I will tell here those that receive a cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that hemorrhoids and ulcers when they are completely filled in the marsh and do not appear to the touch, unless it is with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the mare can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is therefore necessary to put the woman in a cold house, then wait for the ulcer to appear again, and cut it out with tweezers, and dig at its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, as does ace and saffron and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then put his feet in cold water for an hour, then put him in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if bleeding occurs again, so that he falls, then make him sit in a decoction of sumac and apple peels and gall, and then give him flour of rye, mix it with honey and easily, and then apply it to his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if she stops bleeding, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If this does not work, if you make him hang (or breathe hot air) on the back and to the nipples so they will hurt.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take linen, and apply the poultice in juice of plantain or aglet (or elder) with wine vinegar, and make him breathe on it.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess rests, then treat the wound of ointment until he is healed.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And she who is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a harsh head, so they cover it like I have said.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the cure until he is sound.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the marrow.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come in the marrow, such as chancre and abscess of the bone, herpes, eczema, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and other diseases that I have mentioned in this division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is necessary that I write in this treatment the abscesses which come on the marrow, which are not like other abscesses that are made by a bow.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you see the work of iron, look to see whether the abscesses are thick in its beginning, full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red then you will know.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore do not hasten to pierce it, but let it be treated until the pain is eased;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	And then sit the patient on the bed, and have two stools or chairs where he leans, and support his back and assemble his feet so that they are away from the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and spread his thighs apart, and put his arms below his knees, and tie them well with a good ligature;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then draw the bowstring over his right side, and insert the instrument used to cut open the mouth of a mare, because that's what will come next.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you insert this instrument, you fasten the string first to know the depth of the mare's mouth, so that what enters through the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the swelling is greater, so it is advisable to cover with a deep layer of drapery, so that the swelling does not trouble.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is advisable to put the horn of the instrument on top, and to sharpen the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess is opened and one strokes it with the thumb of the hand, they consider covering the forehead, and the spatumile (a type of spoon or ladle) with water.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the arrow is empty, it is advisable to put moist swabs in the wound in olive rosed oil or dry olive oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the moist cloth of the wound on top of the deep layer of drapery, and cover it with the surface without drapery, and over that, place a linen band clean and moistened in water or honey (soaked).
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	After two days of applying treatment, it happens to him.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and no time is lost to apply poultices and wounds by a compress of water and honey, and then boiled herbs like myrrh are long cooked.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	and then reapply the treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is covered with linen, so it is fitting that you should be careful not to apply hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	The first thing is to look at the belly that she knows the shape of the child, and the signs if you see the woman press her nails, and desires to sniff the air:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	so then one hastens for the infant to be born.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	so then you know that this child is according to the natural shape, and is born from his head, and the second comes with him.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, it is advisable to press lightly on his belly, so that the fever passes quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	because when he descends to his head, he brings with him the second joint, and the sinews of his superfluities are cleansed by good cleansing.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this which comes in another way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	Because it comes sometimes to his feet, and comes forth from the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes to his belly, or else, and is changed by chance upon his neck, and by other evil figures.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	so it is necessary to the physician that they be wise and subtle in these things, and avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures by which one must assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the patient comes down with a fever due to natural cause, and the woman in labor groans, and the virtues of her are weak, then she should be placed on a horseback, or the women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and let her oil or fenugreek be cooked until it is done, and then pour the bile between her two nostrils with the small spatula which is this shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and cut the tendon, and strike at her joint until the moistures that are within it dry up;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the belly of the woman until the fever subsides, and if it does not subside, then it is fitting to bind the woman with muskillaige (or fenugreek) salve and olive oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then let her press and vomit in condensies, and tie up her mouth and nose for an hour;
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If it is now, the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands come out freely, then it is fitting to let them settle gradually one by one.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter again, then put the woman on the bed, and lift up her feet.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then throw the bed onto the ground, and secure the woman, so she does not fall when standing.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands cannot enter again, and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the knife which is there before mentioned, and extract the child, and set it aside in a proper manner.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the issue of the child on its feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child stands up on its feet, then they are fitting to push upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn the wound a little by little, until it is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then press against the pain and extend it a little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can he avoid the pain as soon as possible, if he commands so, and make him vomit with condensation;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if he survives, God will be merciful.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not so as we have said, if the blood flows little by little, day by day, until it reaches its natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if he does not come back as we have seen, said so take muscilynge of alum, and oil of chamomile, and gum pounded, and crush all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put the ointment on the belly of the woman inside and cover that ointment, then make her sit in water until just below the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when she is softened because of it, he will make a girdle of iron around her, and put her down, and let one hour pass;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then he will set her on the bed, then he will open her and restrain her mouth and nose, and lightly press on her abdomen, because she now gasps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child after its birth on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the patient comes in this state, he will then put the bile on her hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	Then she will turn to her back on the bed, and let her feet hang down, and then lie still.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and then he will gently pull her hands up little by little, and then press on her hands above the belly, and take off the couch below, so that she is properly arranged.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the fever does not burst, take his feet and hold him firm, then move his feet up to his belly, then give him water.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and pull the child little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to apply herself to the child until it breaks.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the child that comes out wide with one hand only
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	it is advisable to engineer to return the hand;
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be returned, have the woman lift herself up and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, place her on the bed and make her feet move.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the medicinal herbs that I have mentioned;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if it is pregnant, then make her sit on the bed; then study how to bring back the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and bring forth the child according to its natural shape; and make it cut out, and instruct her to bind herself until the swelling subsides.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the child from his neck down to his arms, and had spread out his hands, and his face turned towards his back towards his mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is suitable that the surgeon hold his hand tight, then turn it slowly and slowly, and set her lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is evened out, then put on the natural muscle oil of flesh and fat, as we have said; and instruct her to move slowly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, make her sit on the bed; and instruct her to bind herself.
et la fai esternuer.	And cut off.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of the same manner to all the rest.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this manner on the second joint, if you strike the second joint until the moistures are cleared;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if there is a fever on its face and on its neck, if you strike the throat, so that it does not stop, and the child dies;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then pour the child into the basin, until you have put it in as it is fit, and instruct the woman not to give it any medicine.
adonques si istra legierement.	and thus if it is lightly drawn.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that many times it will be born with a head, and sometimes without one.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is no strange thing, and it has happened often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	They are strange things, and they do not live if it is named.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and they are caused to flourish by the flesh which devises them, which is connected to the blood;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and there is no time when they are not present naturally like all of us have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they are severe, then the cure is as we have said, and it is a subtle bile, and quickly and lightly what she does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and so quickly that they are worth more than usual to the health.
de plusors enfans	Many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Never are they formed in the first or second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, or more than fifteen, and all take on the shape of an infant by the measure of its size, glorious juice, because it is possible that such a thing may have happened;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If it happens as they advise.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When treating a woman with child who has died or miscarried, as I have said in the previous division, and there is no fever, you must perform surgical work with your hands.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is fitting that you know whether the woman has good health, and has not had an accident or has fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is fitting that the woman lies on her back with her knees bent and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister applies the ligature of the second part, or ties her to the bed so that she is not treated with the descent of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oils using musk and fenugreek and sesame seeds, and then apply the balm to her hands with these oils and musk.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Now let the wounds heal lightly; then you should pour wine into the marrow lightly, and later pour vinegar onto what is suitable for this, and take care that the fever does not appear upon his head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if he strikes the glands in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or under his tongue or behind his beard or under his chin or near the ribs, and if the ulcers are on his feet, strike them or prick them and cut the middle of the bones.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that the ulcer appears on his right hand, and place a poultice between the two fingers of his left hand, and pour wine all over his right hand, and strike the ulcer in any of those places that we have mentioned, until it comes to a clean opening.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the onion:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then strike into another onion, or if you need it, so that the extraction is even.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side and the other, so that they come out, and so that the onions are cut to make them hold, as this is the shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if some part remains, then take some of its juice from one of its two sides, and pour it into that part, and treat the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if it does not remain at all, then put this onion a little higher, and do that until it is full of fire.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be returned by stretching, then you must wrap above the bandage, until it is all tight.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then take the axe in the joint of the foot or on the thigh, and do it in the other hand, and make it twice.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the head of the child is swollen and it has a large bone in the discharge or if he has a high fever with an assembled head, then you should pour the spindle-like brush between your two fingers, make the head and extract the fever.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you put it on the instrument called "almaid", because the form comes with the instruments or scalpel which is after this.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and do the same if the child has great natural fever;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then treat the bones with tongs, and if the joints burst, hold the joint with forceps, until the moisture which is or in the discharge is dried.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if she cannot come out, then cut her by pieces at the root where you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you should pierce it as long as the moistors come out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the patient is sitting on his feet, so that there is less pressure on the legs, and the direction of the stomach towards the mouth is lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is swollen in the stomach or intestines, then you must extract it above the groin on the leg.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and pull out the stomach or intestines, until they run out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if other members are swollen and the joint is fixed, then pour the bile into his mouth by pouring from the navel.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then pour one or two ounces, and bring forth.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the nose is compressed by an abscess cold that has come to it, so it should not be strained again, but rather administer soft and wet things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and they must apply poultices, and slice in moist fleshy things and moisten.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child lies on its chest, and you can place it even, then administer those things that we have said for a living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one does not have power, then tie the wound to pieces, and leave nothing of the second line.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, administer those things that we have said regarding abscesses in the nose that come into it.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if they bleed excessively comes, so whether it is put into water, restrain, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whom an infant was dead, and she sought another one above it, and then the other died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After many times the thing happened in the mouth, and it swelled so much that it burst, and great pain came.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was deceived; there is no translation to provide. The text appears to be incomplete or contains formatting issues. Please provide the rest of the text for me to translate.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed a splint of great attraction, and from it an os came out, after some other days.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was amazed a great deal, because this has no bone in the belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I wanted to know the wound, and by probing with my hands, until the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman long time remained thus, and afterwards she died a little while later with pain in her bowels.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have only recorded this chapter because whenever the masters find an unusual thing, they seek assistance.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	Let go of your hair to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Now comes the form of the pressure, for which we use books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and to both joints apply to both bones.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Everywhere, the nails should be more subtle in the restraint, and made of ivory or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And so the mouth of the fist is made very wide, and the margin of the tree is cut, and from long one palm and a half.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And in the two limbs are two adjacent fist-like shapes, which are firmly fixed on one and the other, of a palm and half an inch or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	And these two adjacent shapes are bound in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form is made to resemble it even more subtly and lightly, of a beech or box wood fist, according to the likeness of the nails.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	And has both two fists two adjacent shapes, so as you see, of a palm and half an inch, and both twice as wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	And when you see to open a vein with all the instruments, then seat the woman upon a litter, and place her feet on both sides of it, and then pour two instruments together into the vein, and hold the head of the instrument between its handles.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then operate your hand over all the instruments, so that you have closed both jaws equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the vein of the arm, until it is made as tight as she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	This instrument is on top of them, and they are all multiplied in their appearances;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the instruments have been prepared for them, it is even faster to operate, and they are higher in number according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you don’t see the instrument that is prepared in front of you, for it is not unnecessary.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the shoulder joint is retained in the child, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to grip his arm, and then have him exert himself on his back, and tie your hands to his mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she should fall through this, that is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If this does not work, then cut the flesh, and make a puncture or wound, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as camphor, anise, chamomile, safflower, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or none of them, be boiled or put in water on the fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put a caustic or burnt pot on one head and the other in the mouth of the mare, and tie it tight until the vapors come out from within the mare.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the flesh, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If he has a broken bone immediately.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not improve as much, instruct the physician to pour oil of sesame or musk into his left hand, and then drink from its source, and want the second treatment.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when it is found, grasp it and stretch it little by little straight away, so that the hairs do not break at the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but it is necessary to move it lightly from right to left and then treat.
si venra et se desaerdra.	if it comes and falls apart.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the hair of the marrow is tightly closed, we have already said the treatment of removing and fumigating with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it is not what we have said, so beware that you do not go mad while treating.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is true that what is at the mouth of the mare, which you tie to the chest of the woman, then bind with linen thread.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	so that if the poultice is applied and it comes, and arrives.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but beware, when you apply it, because if she vomits so that the bad smell comes to her stomach and head, and sickens the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	so then it is necessary to apply fumigation, which is a common remedy for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	no one of the ancients has tried fumigation with crescent and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which to fumigate a woman, when it is held by the flowers and second joint if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to look like an ape, and put the head subtle in its place, and bind the arms wide over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let there be fumigation over the embers, and the itch till it is spent, and begin again.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Most children are born without any solid foundation, whereas the head is inflated by some subtle humors.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	so it is necessary to balance when the humors are inflating because of its swelling, and not pour a bad quality into it, but rather tighten the bandage so that it does not touch.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put a wet linen on it in wine and oil, and apply the dressing until he is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt whether it will stop bleeding, then tie off a vein with a tourniquet and let the hands rest for a while, and put on an ostomy when the child gets up to go to bed in the room.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes comes this sudden collapse of a wound or an abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	then it is necessary to cover that wound.
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if you have been cured, as we have said about the sharp iron cut.
de la fistule dou fondement	of a fistula on the underlying part
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Ulcers that come from under the foundation are nodulations, and swelling that comes from over the foundation or in the space between the two parts, if there is an ulcer or more.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that nodulation is old, it becomes inflamed, and moistens the whitish or subtle bowel, and sometimes these ulcers are painful.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and are considered to be caused by what is ejected or ventousity because the patient ejects, and sometimes in an attempt at it.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	If there are fistulas that have perforated the bladder, and just above the middle of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and come to just above the hip joint and just outside of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And so finds one that persists to the foundation, and not persisting:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you pour your dirty index or foundation, and pour a subtle needle of iron or thread into the fistula when there is no twistiness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twistiness, then you pour a subtle tentacle or the horsehair, until you feel the tentacle or the hair at your mouth.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there comes a purging of stool or vomiting or fever, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	She does not prick.
si te haste dou curer.	If you hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is passed just to the bladder or just to the channel of the urine, then it falls into the urine, and cannot be fixed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	But if she pricks right at the joint of the elbow, if the pain comes again to the left.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	but if there is no twisting and the hurt cannot be removed by treatment or with ointment.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these Persian fistulas, there is no cure but hard work and the vanity of foolish people who get involved.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In that which is neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of health by iron, as I have proved, and if the sick patient lies between your hands on his back.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And lift the legs up to their knees, and let the knees be inclined towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then pour out some tar or pitch into the wound, or if it has tortuosity, until you see where the opening comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels pain in the bottom part, if so then pour out your two indices, since then you see if the opening has pierced.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And whether it is discovered or you feel between your thumb the sinus or the cartilage, then know that it is a puncture.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If it cannot be pulled out, neither can it be saved.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	But there is one who is able to heal all cases, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And so instruct the assistant to make it happen, for when it is done as was said before, if you shave the cauterized area according to its size, just like he said;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and pourge the whole inside of the fistula, till it comes from the foundation;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this twice or three times, till you know that these burns should be applied, which are resembling to a feather of a bird;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then apply a moist poultice in butter, till the burns are healed, and then apply a dressing of lint and stitching.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he has such a sickness, this is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	For if this, there is no other way to be cured;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if they pierce between them, and not exactly at the point where it is on the foundation, and between your thumb and the tent, there is a thick covering of fat or flesh, and you see the fistula heal with this covering soft as wool;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If they prick at the beginning of the ulcer, and drink blood afterwards before the tenting, and then apply the cautery, until it comes to a head in the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the head of the ulcer will be discharged and will fall out;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and then make a demonstration of those charred things that seem like a goose feather, and there will be nothing left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if he does not want you to cut between yourself and the wound, but cuts in place of you, whether with fire or with a cooling medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery has two effects:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	which is to say, the inflammation of those charred things, and the contraction of blood and the drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	and then the cure for moist tents in butter or in hoarfrost, until it is dried out and the head of the charred thing falls into the bowel.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Now cure the wound of quick-healing bandages which are tied tight with a harsh thread, and these drying medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	Because when it is restored, it is healed and does not come back again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess comes just to the bottom of its foundation and is distant from the body, then put two or three pounds into its center and inquire.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the pain and enter through two openings where it is like piercing, or if there is only fire on the way of hope and expectation, through the administration of one of three kinds.
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cautersize as we have said, or you cut just to the root, or if you can, take out needles and treat as first.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too far into the root, lest you cover the foundation that holds it in place, and the excretions come out in an unintended direction.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	In case of good health, or if you should lose the covering and the wound then when it is struck at the foundation, or by attempt or by another instrument pointed out;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	and then you must define that free thing which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	and then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the opposite part from the foundation;
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if you give a lighter thing to the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	and no fistulas occur in this way;
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is coming out near the foundation of the skin above, if you take a tent which looks like this at the head;
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I cut the thread on one side and put a tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	She is pierced on the margin of the foundation within, then extract the finger from that puncture, as you pour your dough or foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	And tie the head of the finger together, and assemble both joints together, and hold one to the other, and let it rest for one day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And hold him tight at all times, until the fingers have closed up these spaces that are between them;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound till it is sound and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If they have a fistula or abscess, so pierce it in every manner that you can, if it's not too deeply penetrated.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to tie with a cover if it's too deeply penetrated, and then treat it, as we have said, until it's safe.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spiny staff which we make a fistula from is very rough with one and a half fingers and sharp points;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand not, because of that one does not strike what they should not strike, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Bloodletting can be done in two ways:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	Where they are in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and if there are small and large ones, cut to open the wound, and if there is one or more, remove them from the foundation and the head of the foundation.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are removed do not have much moisture, and cut to open one or a little of the juice of citron or blood, and they have a red color of flesh.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them in the foundation, so that you instruct the patient to cough towards the chambers, until the foundations become firm, and they appear the threads.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if it comes to hand, and you pierce with nails, or hold it with your finger, then cut in its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if they cannot hold their wound shut by its moisture, then take it to the linen cloth or cotton, or from a piece of camel skin;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and cut it open on both sides, then cut, and powder over it with some hot powders that will replace the cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you will cauterize as it is said in the chapter of cautery, for the cures of other cures until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the fundament cannot come out, then bandage the patient with a strong and bitter cloth to cleanse what is in the fundament, if it can come out openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patient is in pain, and if the child has a hard fundament, then the treatment is light.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and so you must grasp at your joint or with tongs, and strike, then heal as we have said, until it is sound, and that the fear of incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	if it seems fitting to dress the wound in this way:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	take a thread of the right kind, and put it in an awl, and then draw the thread above and pierce the awl on the other side, and twist the two threads with the awl below, and if so, make them tight.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and tighten the thread firmly, then take it away, and extract the awl, and do so for all the others, and leave one for draining out the superfluity of the wound;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation a moist cloth in rose oil or in ceruse, and put it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let him stand for a while, so that he passes, and when he is cut, so that the treatment of ointment and other treatments are performed until he becomes whole.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	when cutting firmly with a knife or fundament
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	It happens frequently when there is a sharp pain in the intestine, and by the force of nature, and because the illness is old and medicine is useless.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is fitting to reset him at the point of a spatula or with your nail to remove the scab above, which does not allow it to moisten;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat him until he is whole, as he should.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if he cannot be healed, then reapply the rasping more forcefully than before, until he becomes whole and is scabbed.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat him until he is whole.
dou fremit	do the trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A rash is an unintended appearance on the body, and it will go through its full course;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes the blood freezes, and it feels like death is coming, and it comes to all parts of the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a cane of a goose quill or a strong vulture's feather, and put that cane on the freezing blood, until the purple circles appear all over it.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to the entire cane until you cut all over the freezing blood, and put it into its very roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if it is a thorn of thistle or iron, do so with a thorn from the same material and in that shape, being subtle under and above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Don't pierce, for this will hold them together, and press.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, cauterize the freezing blood, just as it is in front of or near the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of a hollow castor bean.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Nothing is done with gold or lead, or melted tin, or cloth.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And never is anything done with these small and large instruments, according to what they are suitable for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These are therefore the instruments used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the needle small and large when it is used large, or if the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if there is a defecation or the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is inside perceived.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	And if it has a hollow on one side and an opening on the other;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And if the belly or an animal (is treated) with medicines from a cow's bladder or parchment; and if there is perceived all of those small holes, and between each hole there must be space, then fill in one of them with thread very tightly wound around X (or whatever), and sew up the belly like a sow.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is present, so hold it in front of an instrument made of a strong thread, then bind.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and oil the head with a binding of oil or lard or beeswax, or something similar, then pour it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the physician makes his fingers bind him with both hands together, until he is completely still, then remove the binding, and lift up the patient's legs to show, and if the medicine comes out, tie him as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a whole night in this manner, it is more great aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you bind the boils in a disease of decayed belly, and the medicine comes out quickly, so that it recurs when he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if they bleed out from their root or abscess, whether it is a cyst as subtle as for an infant;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle cyst where the skin is constricted:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already discussed in dividing how to treat wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or you will say the remedies for hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to which part or place the wounds are located, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	Things are made so that wounds are caused by a blow of stone, cutting with a sword and knife, or lance, or stick, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or that they are made according to the laws of the body, as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or flesh, or belly, or liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and start with simple head wounds, because they remember coming in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	When a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is due to stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn apart and the wound is great, and you are slightly afraid of an abscess.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if you treat the head wound immediately, if it comes from bleeding of the wound, and treat one side against the other side of the belly.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and the patients should be replenished with wine and thick foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not recover, if he is weakened by thin food, and does not drink wine, and does not eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put salve on the wound, if an abscess forms there, cotton wool soaked in rose oil alone, or vinegar suppository.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if it is not an abscess there, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and does not move from the air, powder, I will say one of these below.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the blood has moved it, then put on some ointments until it is clean.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by stitches, then assemble them by suturing, as I will say about wounds in the belly, of the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to bone and skin, and sticks only at one point, cut.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then treat the wound with medicine, and restore the flesh by replacing it with leather, and instruct the patient to eat large quantities of food, such as meat, cooked eggs, and poultry, as well as similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	If you find rot or putrefaction, and it has not reached the bone, cut it through completely, and throw away, then take care.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	If there is an artery in the wound or vein, without applying a tourniquet, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, choose to release the artery, and if you find the artery is loosened, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	If this does not benefit, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light.
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and that you apply this powder which causes the pain to move.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	Take some embers (fire) part from them;
sanc de dragon II parties;	blood of the dragon two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	Mix three parts of vivifying powder and subtle powder, apply to the wound, bind and fasten so that it bleeds well and unites with its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then tie well, and let loose when it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for you do not remove the medicine until she is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at no time is this made alone with calcined vivae, when you do not have cense or blood of dragon, but the artery has been moved by the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	and if the artery moves the wound itself, at that very moment, do not put on this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put some digestive ointments or powder made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until it sets well;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	the healer of other remedies until he is cured.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	and if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, so that the strait is pinched finely;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about this later after the head fractures.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between the one on the head and the other, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	if it is the neck, if there is no other remedy to leave the treatment and put nothing restraining, for he heals slowly and makes them retreat;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of the sickness is with the brain, which is in the higher members;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but if medicine is needed, such as calcining in sweet water and mixing with rose oil, and cooling the solution also in sweet water, and other minerals like this, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so that the skin and tendons are cut and bound with bandages, then the treatment continues until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and he has a head full of blood, then cut to the lower part.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the arteries are cut open and bleeding comes, then take out the artery, and apply ointment, and cautery to cauterize it.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spines of the throat are cut open or the nerves, and the vessels are bound up because the flesh is going, then cut the vein on the chain of the neck, but do not touch the throat itself, rather apply it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then bind him at once, and let him stay for some days, then the treatment of ointments and poultices until he is made whole.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has caused impression in the bone;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if he has broken bones, so that the limbs are completely frozen and unable to move, and whatever you can't see, leave until the wound is closed and the limb is set straight again.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, so powder on top of the powder that I said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has an abscess, then the treatment will be as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of arrow or sword wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it's an arrowhead or a knife cut, and the wound is deep, then look at how many arrows have gone through to see if the patient will live.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	so you know that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it's not deep, and the wound is fresh all over with its blood, then don't put powder on it for the first hour, nor tie it to prevent the bleeding as much as possible, revive him in your arms, and give medicine to the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	But I apply an attractive dressing twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	And if you do not have dressing, put cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four days, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	But if there is no spasm, nor trembling of the heart, due to an evil spirit.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the healthy disposition, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat it then with poultices and other remedies, until it is fully healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	And if it cannot heal and close, then know that there is an abscess;
si la cure si com on doit.	If the cure is as we must.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is an incision with a sword or a knife, and it's shallow, or deep, or on the back, then do the cure of what is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	since she is great, stitch it up.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it's small, cover it with powder; and if it's pierced into the bone, and has cut off pieces, as it pleases, and if they are exposed wounds.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if there aren't exposed wounds, then leave the wound to dry out, for it will ease the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds that affect other members, consider the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	a rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The internal rupture of the intestines is great and painful;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	when there is a large wound in which no intestine can pass, or the intestines themselves are torn apart, because of the infection.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the stitches are more painful, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because of this we put in more stitches to close the intestines, when not putting them back inside their original position.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestine swells so quickly that it feels the pain, if it is put back in stitches again, and because of this small wounds are more painful, so that one must clean these internal injuries like others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And says that the intestinal rupture is in four kinds:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The common stitches that occur on the belly, and the stitches for other wounds of the body, are also common with other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and all those stitches are more proper with the belly stitch, and I will tell you each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I said that when the wound is small, and no intestine has been ruptured, and there is little to put back together, it is one of the two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because of the smallness of the wound, as we said, or because the intestine is swollen from the blow.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, burn him in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Molest him with an onion soaked in hot water or with a handful of cloth dipped in cold water, until the swelling is gone.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes this wine is made to restrain, and it causes the soul to shrink.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestine with water or make it high and boil, because by this is cleared the entry into little things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then they make the wound slightly larger with that tool on which the hemorrhoids are struck;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is that they shrink it to its size, so that none of us should cut it unless there is great need.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the way to break it;
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	so they cut inside the hornet's nest and do not retreat, and see how the form is.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines spring out, if you put it back in its own natural form according to its own place, if you have the power, because this is necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, it is fitting that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you put his head and belly higher than the lower parts, and also if there is a rupture of the belly in one of its two parts, so that the navel is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and accordingly it is fitting to do as I said in large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds put on what is suitable, and then hold in your hands the minister who holds all the wound in his hand, and assemble the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common method of stitches, and it is that you prick an arrow or more, according to the quantity of the wound's width; then let one inch from the top of the wound, and poke in with a needle or strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	And pierce the two sinew tendons with two needle tendons, which are inside the skin, until you pierce from that part; then assemble the two head of needles four together.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then thread the end of a double thread around the needle in two parts; then assemble the two head of stitches on the wound together, and let one inch from that point, and poke in with another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then tie the thread in the same way you made the first needle, and do not stop doing that until all the wound is held tight;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be medium in size, between fine and coarse, for the fine needles pierce all of the flesh, and the too large ones cannot enter very well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for this is why they must be medium in size.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not wise to push the needles too far into the flesh and the skin, lest they pierce and open up the wound before the suturing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cut the needles to stop the bleeding of the patient while they sleep, and put tourniquets or bandages around the points of the needles to keep them from pulsing, and let them stay there until the wound is sutured.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it uses either one needle.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second operation is common, and it is that you assemble the two head of the skin and the two joints of the flesh together with an awl or with one strong thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have assembled the two heads of the skin four times, then take out the awl from where you started, in the way one cuts threads;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put space between each seam the thickness of a small penny;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This costure takes seven hours, and I sewed a wound on one man who had an arrow wound in his belly, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm of flesh, and it was the intestines well two palms of flesh, and the wound was inside the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I let my intestine alone for 24 hours then it stopped bleeding after 15 days, and the cure, and was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they had taken him to judgment that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not treat him with medicine, because I was in the left place where there is no remedy or medicine to be found;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and put more wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	or I will tell you two proper ways to sew:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle and thread from that same place inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when she has pierced the correct mark from straight to straight, whether it is on the skin of a siphon or on a cut or wherever you have sewn the needle, and then pierce her from that same place inside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	For the ears of this costume, so that you sew as the barber does the hair, and you leave once the incision is made on one side, and the other covers it, until the costume is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second manner of costume, which the Galens call properly, is this: they put together both parts in one piece naturally, and join one part of the skin to another part of the skin, like so:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Stick a needle or a small pin close to the wound, and pierce it alone, and leave both joints of the skin.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and pierce it from the opposite side inside, through both joints of the skin.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce one of each from the back part which was previously hidden in that place, in two other joints on the opposite side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the most common method of sewing and stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	People who are not familiar with this phrase, and none of them testify to it, we must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread in one.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and you must put one needle from one side and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew open wounds.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and it is known that when a rupture occurs in the belly, the stitching is more grievous than for other wounds on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, in such a way that the arrow has moved it, then you put back the intestine and the cost.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on the powder mixed with charcoal, and if the arrow has moved it, put on any dressing that is available, until the wound closes.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut off the thread, and sew the sinew, and the mirror;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure the wound as you do with others, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you do not have medicine, put on, immediately until it comes out to the surface, cotton wool, and move it two times a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	You have no need for any other medicine apart from simple cases.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound will not cause commonality to the principal members, then it is recommended that you make a lighter application of oil on olive tree warm, or rose oil, and put it between the angles, and under the awnings;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and it often happens, if you give him black vinegar clisters, and most of the time the putrefaction comes just to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and drill inside, and see that when it's the large intestine, it's easier to cure than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "youth" cannot heal when it is diseased, and this is because of the coldness of the veins, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and the approach of its nature towards death.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the zirb jumps out of the wound, then set it back as the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it has grown old and become black like that, then it is proper to cut the limb which has turned black, lest blood does not come out of it again, for there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then tie what is between the ligature, and hang the two heads down from the lower part of the wound to relieve the extraction of the serpents that come out, and the wounds.
de la routure dou boueil	of the burn from a hot iron.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are swollen, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, because I have seen that one man was crippled or had his belly torn by a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and this was the wound in the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into an abscess, and from that came the expulsion and the vomiting.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I will translate the text line by line into English.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him heal, I doubted that the patient had a bad condition in his stomach.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no illness, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimented that when he had a small wound in the intestine, he should be bound in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	wrap the gauze around great testicles, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the gauze has closed over the mouth, place it on both lips, so that it chokes his mouth.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then he strikes the testicles, and this holds so that he cannot loosen it, then puts another gauze on in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely closed.
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	When the intestines are bound with a thread in the intestine of an animal, in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the head of this thread from the intestine that is very clean, and then tie to the head of the other fine thread twisted with linen, and push the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it through the route.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of sewing is not effective except according to the way of promise and expectation;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal channels, then there will be no gain or healing except by subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or however it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	That which has grown long, when it begins to wither, is called a fistula; and even when it is swollen and has turned into an abscess.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the shape of the node that is not free and hard and white, or one does not feel pain, and is also like the beak of a bird's feather;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes clear, and sometimes thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	none of the above, or somewhat.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken about the division of wounds in my previous writings, that any wound which is not healed, and does not have ulcers, is only caused by one of the seven reasons:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, from the smallness of the wound or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its malevolence;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because it has hard flesh inside and on the lips, which prevents ulcers from forming;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	There is too much blood;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the meat is spoiled and of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or if the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because of that, corruption is a kind of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because in the region's property, digestion is late, health is also late, and escapes by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones;
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have shown all these causes, and signs, and treatments of medicine in the cutting.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is fitting that I inform you about the treatment of fistulas, which are created by hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Observing that a fistula has occurred in every member of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	For in the fistulas that come from great veins, and from arteries, and from nerves, or to the scrotum, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or on some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it comes to damage of the principal member, and like this.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas of this manner are a hindrance to healing, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is no fistula that has not come to you just like I said, and you have taken it for a cure, and it seems to be working, then take a tent of iron or wire, whether the fistula is straight, or crooked.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the abscess is twisted, then search for a subtle attempt to insert it deeper, because the points bend and move into the twisting.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the abscess has broken through and you cannot see it well by searching with attempts, then try to isolate it by one of the breaks, because the moisture is short from one break and contaminates;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and then ask for a careful examination of your poor body, so you know if it has bones or nerves, and see whether the bone is exposed to the fullest, and ask the patient well where he feels the pain when I press with my hand;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know where it is, and if it is near a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and extract the worst part and the rotten flesh that are inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then the treatment as long as it is safe, and if the fistula is well set in straight, so that you can copy them by depth, as long as you are able, then put wet towels on medicine cold, and pour juice into the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the remaining surplus at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then put salve in equal proportions to keep it healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not kept healthy by this, then the cautery as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then make a copy.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If you wish or nurse them do not trouble or main members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then keep it until the corruption is completely gone, then do treatment in equal proportions as long as it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not well, and the bow breaks like before, know that you are not far from death.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if it is discovered and you want to be at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore life;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is so well, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	But if not, know that the corruption is too far gone, and you cannot recover;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	unless there's no other remedy but to put your life in nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there's only a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tongs, if the instrument is suitable for it, and if it has many bones, then do not leave one behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if moisture causes it to turn against him, and there is no mistake or fear, then he will be struck by both moisture and cold, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove it in an hour, place the wound covered with a poultice to prevent putrefaction, and let them remain until the flesh is decayed between the bones, then they will have less difficulty with the bones.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, such as the thigh or knee, then only repair the decay until all the marrow has gone, and then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a great part of the corruption, and it brings just to the bone.
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then it is best to cover and cover all just until the point of the corruption, and then treat the patient until they are well.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to someone at home in their leg, so that you may take an example and help with your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	There was a young man in his XXX years who had pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body, until the matter came out through his leg, and a large abscess broke open, and he could not get rid of it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But the physician by his folly operated above so that the abscesses opened up and a lot of matter came out, and it became a fistula, and it was very painful to everyone who felt it in their body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And many physicians had operated on him for two years without any success in the art of hands, until I was called and came to see his leg and the remedies that were being used to cure it, and what was coming out through the boils was causing great pain.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And it would become red the body of the young man, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I applied a poultice to one of the boils, and then I searched for all the boils, and found that some came together from different parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I failed then, and cut into one of the wounds so that I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, with corruption inside the bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I recognized what appeared to be the rotten bone, and thought that there could be no other corruption, except for the one I had taken.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to restore the wound with medicinal salts over a long period of time and could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then resumed, and discovered the bone in its original form, and found that the corruption was still present in the bone, and I thought about sewing it back together.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But I could not bear to cut into one palm of bone, and the wound became all swollen, then I restored it with medicine.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it was healed and the swelling went away quickly, and I did not want to reopen the wound further except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and because of my fear of his death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood so often occurs, but it has healed completely, and in its place an hard char came out of the bone, and was of good disposition and had no harm or counter-evil in all things, neither at the bedside nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it must be set in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	bind it tight, and stretch the ligature to the top of the bone that is open.
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and I put another stronger rope around the first one, and bind it above the joint that has opened the bone, and stretch it there, if you treat the corrupt part downwards, uncover the healthy part above, where it is visible, until the sinew does not bleed the healthy part.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And let him tie it to a stick or a table below the bone so he covers the corrupted flesh.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to cover it as often as one can see and feel the corruption, and cover again afterwards.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	But if the bone is corrupted and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then he must cut away the flesh entirely.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then let him tie sticks underneath, and then cover the corruption with one part over another; cover it so that the upper part is close to but not on top of the corruption as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then he must cut the corrupted joint, and cover the bone where it contains corruption on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption is at the continuation of both joints, there is no other source than from the covering;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if the corruption is in a finger of the hand, or in a finger of the foot, it is very severe in that case, but nonetheless you must inquire about the source of that corruption, how it arose;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and purify it in all the ways you can, but so that the vein or the nerve does not prevent you from doing so;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the incisors and the hairs around these bones are many, according to the base of the bone and its appearance, and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and fragility, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each similar form with its own instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And you will know from the work that it will show you the instrument which you have need of, according to your knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways in which the diseases are treated;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you think the instrument that you have need of according to what it is suited for.
dou feu	Fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	the joints are supposed to be moved either due to something being inside, or due to something being lacking;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have medicine to heal the corruption by the treatment of medicines, and it does not help, if it is necessary to cover that limb up to its root where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes either by death or by the evil of the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the limbs become black, as if they were burnt with fire, and afterward pus forms, which goes to each limb in succession, and spreads throughout the body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you have haste to cover yourself, and if it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as scorpions from the sea and wyrms and similar ones, if the wound is on the head with two cuts, if they strike, and give no space between coming just to your hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just to the hand, if it strikes the joint, so that the wound does not come to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, if it strikes the bone;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the bone, it is death, and there are no medicinal fires worth anything except the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and thus you must do so whenever the wound comes to the bone:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it comes to the first joint, then she must strike after the second joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes upon a bone, then cut the entire bone.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if she rises on the leg, then strike at the joint of the knee.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if she comes above the knee, then there is no other action but to strangle the patient to death.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the manner of cutting or sewing the member if it is that you tie it above and below, and stretch out one strap below and another above, and serve the flesh between the two straps to a width of one span, until the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then cut or sew, and put a strip of linen on each side, so that the seam does not touch the healthy part, and it comes to the patient another wound and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	If blood comes out when you cut, then cauterize the wound immediately, or apply some powders that restrain it;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine until it is complete, and bind the injured limb with a strong bandage, and cure it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you how it happened in the house when it was under siege;
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	there happened a blackness that seemed like fire, and this corruption came first to his two feet, until it consumed the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when he saw the corruption, he hastened to cover his foot, and was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long after that, the corruption returned to his two hands, and he came to me, and I put certain remedies on him after purifying his body, but it could not be stopped.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And I command you to cut open my hand, and I do not wish that I have hope of feeling the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also fear that if my hand is cut open, he will die, for the virtues of the flesh are weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he was desperate and returned to his land, and sought to cover his hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have this story told only because of the fact that someone needs to do it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No time ever comes when an abscess appears on the jaw, and lingers for so long that it causes a great swelling of the face.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it rots and infects, and the swelling goes away, just like in our own bodies.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And the skin that is above is as subtle as I weave, and it does not run against the bone, or against the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy", and it is not called "furuncle";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it comes against the bone to its full extent, then it is called "furuncle";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is that you cut through the entire skin, and at the same time when it is subtle, as we weave;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not heal because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have taken a vow that the skin heals, and there is no corruption in its entirety, and the skin is thick with fat, then the surgeon should make an incision like this:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Look to see if the breasts are large, and the bowels which are in them are of foul odor, then apply the Egyptian medicine that is made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take onyx, and oil, and lard, equally, and put them to boil in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine becomes red, and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take as much of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and make a plaster for the breast, and tie up the hernia;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine on for two hours, then extract it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times until the breasts are well done, and come out loose.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	And sometimes it clisters over water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you take ashes from the vine's stock, and pour water above, then it flows out, and clisters, until you know that the breasts are well healed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	But if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then if you mix water and honey, so that there is a little lead in it.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you mix it with honey and wine mead, so that the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine is made to warm the healthy.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breasts are well purified, if the clisterization of what is born from the chyme in them, and if you make emplasture diaphanite, and do it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	If you prick at your base with these cautery tools, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the hole in the breast is small, and the needle of the cautery cannot enter, cut through with a small iron bar and apply an Egyptian bandage or basilicon cloth until it is enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too large, so that only the cut or the cautery can enter it, and if a perforated bowels are above, cut through below.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is in its deepest passage, do not let it be released.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the breast beneath as it is seen, so that the bowel moves to its lowest passage, for when the bowel reaches its deepest point, do not let it be released, and if you cannot cover the breast beneath as it is seen, do so in this manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	The bowel moves lighter than expected and does not stop anything of the bowel.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	And take conservative medicines to place on the healthy part, and cover it with linen cloth that covers the entire body.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then tie the force to the broken breastbone in a way that is larger than the first one, for they apply ointment on the other covering according to the quantity of the break, and put it over the healthy part to alleviate the bowel, and do not hold back the large cloth with fire until after many days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And he who is on the broken breastbone often opens the bowel, and knows whether it is poisoned or not, how much blood comes out, whether it is venomous or not, or if it is being digested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And take care if the patient feels pain or distress, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has reached this degree of spread and you see the nature that lies above the hurt flesh, then learn that the limbs are ailing.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then release the bandage in the morning or on the third day, and when you open the wound, change another dressing, and renew the wrapping.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast moves back and forth indigestion after many days, you see that the breasts do not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the fine veins are cut after long time, do not despair of your health, for good health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are some who delay treating their wounds with charcoal, and those who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if he has an indigestion that causes pain in the breast after many days, learn that the breasts are not healing.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	And if the breasts are late to heal and are swollen, then add dry medicines with moisture and dry ones in virtue, just as bandaging is defined, because there is a great part of vitriol, and that's the last medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Prepare the wound with a defined shape, and do it with olive oil rose, and apply the rose from old wine equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then the dressing is applied afterwards;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and the same thing is done as a confection, when it is not present at the wound, or you take a mirror and oil and incense, and break them, and grind the powder on the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then in glue you tie and wrap, and stretch it on the chest, and at no time do you administer an aromatologist long as, and the roots of the celestial lily, which is also like fine flour twice a hundred;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and using simple or compound remedies:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Break the bone, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I said, and apply it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the patient is long-lived and has not been cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has gone to the very bone, or is causing hardness in the bones, or swelling.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	as for the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	From the root of the abscess
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that forms in the space between the thumb and the palm of the hand, or in the toe, or sometimes elsewhere.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is old and no one takes care of it, the abscess can come to the toe, and it spreads and fills with pus as much as possible, until it reaches the root of the ulcer, and sometimes even further.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes the corrosion just to the bone, until it comes with painful odor, and the joints become swollen, and the color flees.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If you treat it as we said in the division, and the cure does not work at all, then it is necessary to copy on it; that is, to make a piece of the flesh around the abscess until its remaining part is closed up, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is much great aid if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the joint presses on the cartilage and begins to pierce it, and the flesh bleeds, so that you must put on the right under the joint, pointing towards the cartilage, and the nail in above, and strike that subtle and light blow, and put on the rest of the cartilage with medicines burning and corrosive to remove.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the cure shall be applied until it is sound.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, then strike it, and pull out, for as long as the bone is corrupted, so will not heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see the wounds corrupting, then treat them in the way as it has been said, until they are cured.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is frozen and swollen, and feels great pain, it is best that you cure him first.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the swollen area with a sharp instrument, cutting across it, and be careful that the incision does not go too close to the flesh beneath the swelling, because the patient will feel great pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if there is anything put on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain comes from a swollen finger.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The swollen joints of those who have been injured by the blows of others' hands sometimes burst, and sometimes there are bones, and at times a single joint, and never does any birth occur in the roots of the joints, or they do not come out from some bone.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those who are born with no sign of the wound do not move at all, and those who are born at the joint of the wound may or may not move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The height of him who is fat is lighter, in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	height measured from the root of a broad spatumile.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born at the root of a joint is injured to be cured:
si te tien dou coper.	if he holds himself tight.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In him who is born or must be at the rear end, if it is fitting that you copy the circular movement just over the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate needle to its suitable length, and cure until he is well.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden sounds that come from within the joint occur by birth, or by a sudden wound, or by fire's burning, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If one covers that wound, so the broken part must be repaired according to their natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then puts between two towels or cloths moistened in rose oil, so they will not stick.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two thin strips of ponce (a type of fabric), until they stick, if it is fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the sound comes to one of his two joints with the palm, cut the wound as it seems fitting.
des vils	The old ones
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	These are heavy veins swollen with a foul pus, full of melancholy humors, which come out in more severe members of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And it happens most to those who walk on feet and work hard and carry burdens.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary to give them no stomach medicine and then cleanse with basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	There are two ways of treating with iron.
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is to cut them open and treat the black wound;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other way is to tie off the vein and drain its force.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The cutting is according to this method;
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	the first is the ankle of a hot water vessel very strong, until the thick flesh is broken down, then strain the swollen leg of the sick person from above to below at the level of the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Now cut the vein at the joint, whether it's in the left or right hand, of a large size, then raise and pull out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much as possible without causing harm to the patient.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then tie it, and instruct him to fasten his diet eating black meat.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and resume the evacuation and bleeding when veins are empty, and harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The bloodletting is done in this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	raise the leg of the patient, if it has much hair, then put it in hot water, and let the leg be immersed in warm water until it becomes red, and the veins swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have pain, then apply the heat of fire, and then strike it directly into the vein at the long distance to the head at the side of the knee; or in the lower part near the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then cover the wound with linen, and burn the vein from each side until it stops bleeding when felt;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and then you see the vein red and black, and when it enters the linen so that it seems like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then pour out the blood below, until it is lifted up by the linen, and then put it on a lighter linen, then strike again into the other place, at the three-dozen.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then burn the skin above the vein until it stops bleeding, then lift it up by the blood, just as you have done, and put it on another linen, just as you did before.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Now I have to move another joint, or if you don't need more, then lift it and strike at the same height twice with two feet;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then pull out the joint by joint until it moves entirely, then strike.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot pull and lift it, then prick with a needle into the strong thread tightly fastened, strike, and turn your hand on both sides until it moves.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and hold that it will not strike again, because if it strikes, then it cannot be pulled or lifted, and it will cause harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have entirely pulled it out, put a linen cloth moistened in wine and oil on the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the healer so that he may be healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the body is broken and twisted and turned around together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must break it severely, but do not cover it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and cut it as we have previously instructed.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	the form of the bone from which one cuts the skull should be curved, and do not pierce it, lest you cut the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of large curvature, because if it were subtle, you would cut the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the common vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is located in the lower limbs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in earth that has no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and perhaps it appears in another place than in the joints, and this happens due to putrefaction that comes from beneath the skin, as when it comes within the body like a snake and towards the flesh, you must press between the skin and the bone.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	If the inflammation of the vein is such that it comes to the leg a great swelling, then change the fluid, and begin the venesection forthwith, as one would take root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the joint is opened, it is advisable that you wrap around a piece of linen, one and a half fingers' breadth from the wrist to two and a half fingers' breadth, and the knee, and let the linen remain on the leg, and every time when it is not in front, wrap around the skin.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining part around, and do not cover its root, until all of it has been used up.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it off, it may return into the bone, and cause an abscess and putrefaction at that place, and a worse illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this small thing it is necessary to treat her little by little until the head, and there remains nothing in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And there is no time when this vein is treated with the length of one palm, or X, and someone comes to me who has come from X palms in length, and when you copy it, if it brings forth blood or is lost, and the arrow goes straight to the bone, so that all falls.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And if the material is empty inside, and nourishes with medicine for a day, then the cure does as the abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And there is no time when this vein bursts in the joint of the foot, or of the foot, and it comes out much blood, and from it come clots.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure the wound as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between the leather and the cartilage.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called "bovine malady" in our land, because it often affects those who have eaten beef, and it is a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh, and moves up and down the entire body, causing pain from member to member, until the skin bursts or it jumps out.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is associated with the accumulation of some humors, such as worms, lice, and parasites that live in the belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and one doubts its malevolence, because when it moves through the body, and goes up to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	And this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being treated and cured, if it does not burn then, only.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	So it is necessary that you tie the patient above and below with a strong band tightly bound, then strike above and cure it, and if they fall to the bone completely in the chest, do not touch them, when burning with fire on top, until death occurs;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does is that they run on oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or near the oil, then bind under it the cord tightly formed, then strike above and cure.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to treat the patient with mundification of the body, using soluble medicines for corrupting humors, and if they are sick of spoiled or rotting flesh.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of pain which comes from inflammation
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and moves from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I saw what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I went to see a sick woman, and she showed me one of her arms, and saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and after that, I saw it growing even faster like a worm on the shoulder, much sooner than anything else, like living silver when it cuts through its flesh at another place.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain left the arm and went to the shoulder, and then it spread throughout the body for a little while, until it reached the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	The patient told me that they are turning inside out, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed greatly how she moved from one member to another, because I had never seen this disease in that way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	All the time I have heard that people who have had an operation like this are in great pain afterward, but I myself was not, just as I saw it in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that this was why the woman had a pale complexion and swelling of the veins, and because she appeared so constrained.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not appear like this because of that reason in those who are lean and have pale complexions and swollen veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see someone treating this illness, and the patient feels that pain, just as we have said, if they lift up and lower down hastily, and then strike them severely so that the swelling in the limb increases.
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the joint;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it in your eyes, the physician of those who suffer from wind colic, as it is said to be caused by foul pills and serpent pills, and similar things.
des saiettes	due to arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their shapes and according to the sizes of their bodies or where they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	For the diversity of them is that there are those with great points, and small ones, and spines, and sutures;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those with two points, and those with tongues, and those with pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and those that shed into any member according to its two manners:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in the principal member it sheds like cerebrum, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls down then in any limb of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	if it is necessary that you separate from the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in various conditions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when that bad sign does not appear to you and the arrow is not driven straight into it, then you must take up a knife and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces the bone and passes through the brain, where scotoma and pain are felt, with redness on the eye, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and mixture of understanding, and vomiting blood.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	And if by chance he does not have fever of the nose, or of the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and if by chance it affects his speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and falls out of the moist white wound like pus, and also as if it were burnt charcoal;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears to you, then take away the wound if it is not bound.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the wound when it bleeds or pus, is that it is near the left breast, and feels like if it were pierced in something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and if the wound goes mute like pus, and in a black poultice, it comes with coldness and sweat, and fainting;
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	When they are old enough to sense doubt, then death comes.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never bears pain beyond a smooth discharge from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, sighs high and breathes cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if an arrow shatters in the cover of the thigh, so that it is loose from the small bones.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and causes great pain and great sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow is shot into or through the stomach, by chance, it may jump out of the wound without removing any indigestible matter.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow shoots into or through the intestines and does not break up against the gallbladder, nor goes into any other part of the intestine, there is no hope for a good cure or the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if an arrow shatters in the bladder, and the urine bursts forth and comes out, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Therefore he knows that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the arm and shoulder and neck and elbow and shoulder joint and shoulder blade and spine of the back and fist and chest and arms and legs, are safe in proportion to other dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it's not venomous, just as I told you, because of this that you will do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It has happened in one’s home where an arrow pierced or cut the root of the nose;
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and I pulled out from the other side the fat of the ear, and he was made whole in a short while.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And he pulled out a arrow from the fat of his ear under the parchment, and the arrow was returned, and you could only reach as far as the point towards his fist, and it was a large Turkish bow with all its iron near the ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The wound healed, and no other bad accident happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And he pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic bow.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved the beard, and worked on it very subtly until I pulled it out, and the Christian was made whole.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And carry a sash to the house where he was laid or on his belly, and thought he was dying;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after he had passed XXX days, if his condition did not improve.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut open the sash and tied it in place, and applied it, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if I saw a man who had cut or bruised himself on his back.
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the sash remained inside him for a while, and his natural disposition did not worsen, nor did he find any pain in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And saw another man who had cut an artery on his face, and the wounds were opened.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and he suffers thus with great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	And many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And one arrow was stuck in the body of the king's son who had fallen from his horse, and he was slightly leaning to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	And the arrow was completely lodged.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was summoned to the physician after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I sought her out with great subtlety, and did not find her;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he could feel a prickling and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it might be the point of the arrow, I put up his left shoulder blade and stomach lining, because he was swelling.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I found the arrows of the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the ointment to my hands every day, and healed the wound directly, and so kept the patient for a long time, until he felt the arrow was inside his nose.
et il le me dist.	and it told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I placed above the wound a medicinal mixture of acid and corrosive by hand every day, until it had dried up, and I tried it, and felt that the head of the arrow was drying in the place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I closed up the opening of the wound with that acid mixture, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and after four months had passed well, I saw if the wound could be closed by cutting open my flesh to both sides of it, and it would not come out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Now cease not from subtilizing and devising of means, until I took one day the tongs well made, according to what their form will come in the end of this chapter, as long as I do it, and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And they judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restore it then, and the wounds were soldered, and the patients were completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Or I have told you the quality of extracting arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, because books cannot learn everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But wise masters have done little beyond a small thing, and on what is present but failing, they find new work and nine instruments, by the discovery of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not come out of limbs where they are stuck, except according to two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or because they enter from the left or otherwise.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps over because it enters is an arrow entering into the inner limbs, and now it never happens again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if she does not jump anymore, then let it remain as long as the inner limbs are putrid and infected, and let the issue come out.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if she is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, let it remain so for some days, and move with every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then she jumps, and if she does not jump, if there is a puncture in every part of the forehead, until the inner limbs are enlarged, and then take it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if an arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and it waits until just before one of the veins of the brain, and some of the accidents that I mentioned are revealed to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	but if it is not treated promptly, but let it stay there for some time, because if the arrow comes to the same spot as an abscess, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck only in the bone and does not come out right, and it stays there for some days without a serious accident, then the ingenuity of handling the situation.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply stuck in such a way and cannot come out without great effort, if you administer tartarium inside, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the patient until they are fully recovered.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is put back in the body of man if we cannot see it, if it has filled the entire cavity.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, then if there is no suitable instrument available;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you cannot cut through the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow wound, and there is no bone or nerve exposed, then try to cut as long as the wound will allow.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	And pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are nails in the arrow with which it clings to your ear, if one of two parts is stuck in the flesh that you can reach, then break or bend the nails so that you can pull the arrow.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And carefully, so as not to break the arrow, pull it out more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, even if the pain persists until the wound has closed, then treat it, for the extraction is an agony.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the blood causes a counteraction, then follow what we have said about the treatment in this chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	And beware of the incision on the nerve and vein, and put in place as you wish to move the arrow quickly, or soon or firmly.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And put the patient according to the shape he is in when cutting into the arrow wound, because this is the greatest aid that can be, and if you cannot do it, then put him according to what the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow wound that comes from the other side, or if it is blocked with something, or if the skin is inflamed in that place which can be seen or felt afterwards:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	cutting down therefore on it, as long as the tongs can take hold, and then pulling out;
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it is stuck now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand around it, until it enters into the bone, and widens the bone, then pull.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, so let it go again, and then continue extracting until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if an arrow is stuck in the wound, pour out the entire arrow.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the arrow comes out, and you see pouring medicine, then pour the medicinal instrument into the wound so that the points of the arrow enter the hair of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then pour out, and if the arrow is stuck in the hair, then pour the medicinal instrument with points entering into it, to help extract.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched down, it is best to copy the whole shaft to where the venom is or is supposed to be, if possible, then treat the wound as it seems.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow sticks out or pierces or to the belly or bladder or chest, and it is near a vein, then you can cover up, if you must.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and protect the vein and nerve, and then pull them out, and then cut the wound, because it is necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until it is cured.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the tongs used to treat arrows is like a bird's beak, and thus it looks:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form that has hair on the end is like a bird's feather, to press against the tip of the arrow, just as it is:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the pliers for pressing and packing if it is here:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins on the body common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	Of veins from which one can cure oneself are thirty-one, because there is an opening for sixteen (this means that)
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	two branches which are after the ears, called "the two 'herbs'.
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing.
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the two armpits of the two eyes, called "aspire".
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein which is swollen at the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the head of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two guidebones which are on the collarbone;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins which are in the upper lips of the mouth, and these are called "augerich" or veins.
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins below the tongue;
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	the veins of which one is commonly found in each arm,
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cerebral vein, and it is on the left side of the chest, and they call it "vein of the head" among the people.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	And the moine is called "faste", and it is composed of the cerebral and basilic, and they call it the people of the village "vein of the heart".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And the basilic is located at the right side of the shoulder, and they call it the people of the village "vein of the stomach", and it is above the flesh, and it is that from which one heals, who manifestsly opens up above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the radial vein is the one that is between the auricular and the ulnar vein.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg, where it is at the foot are three veins.
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is beneath the wing of the pocket on the left side of the shoulder, and the second one is at the ankle on the right side.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein which is called "nesse", is located at the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins under those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The vein that is located behind the ears if aided by ancient remedies for catarrhs and migraine;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the vein, just as I tell you, and is that by raising the patient's head, and stroking the cloth or veins with a rough fabric;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then the patient's neck is tightened with a strap, until the two veins are visible behind the ears at two levels of the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	because then one must press down on it, and where you feel the pulse beneath your thumb.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Take the lancet, and the braid down through the vein just beneath the bone; then lift your hand up to the entire vein head, and strike and cut and let the vein go well. II must now penetrate into the wound as far as you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then tighten it up so that it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The sickness of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if there is old inflammation and soreness, and accustomed ophthalmia, and at the place of the tears drops into the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the sicker are as I said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and thus the patient must tie his neck so tightly that both veins appear open.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and they feel pain beneath their throat and then let go.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lift the vein up high towards your throat index finger, and pull out the lancet underneath, and lift the vein up high again, and strike it, just as you did in two other veins, and do bleed according to your necessity.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then put the patient down, and place your index finger on the vein for an hour, then cover with cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then tie it off, and let it be until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and this is what we have discussed and treated in their application and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The sickness of the vein on the forehead is worth as much as the sickness of the head with ancient diseases such as emigration and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that patients who strain their neck in twisting will be aware.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "surgical saw", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press upwards from your hand, or from another thing, and let the wound bleed according to how much you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then deliver to the patient the neck, and tie the vein so that it is clean and there is no bleeding whatsoever.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	All things considered, it is not necessary to make them too big.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	And the strong one goes awry, for the bone is near, and by chance, breaks the sharp thing when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The injury of the two veins that are in two arteries if you hold fast to the eyes, and to the sinew, and to the redness, and to the swelling in the ear, and of the diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the qualities of their injury are such that the patient is straining his neck by twisting any ligament, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the wound, and if there is a strong wound through it, a little long with a sharp flame, a little wide, for there is no chance of being caught.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flame (cautery) is subtle, perhaps it will break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then do a stitch in the wound, so much as you have need, and then tie it up tightly, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The affliction of the gallbladder with bile, so much as it causes fever and soreness, and diseases of the face, such as emigration and redness that comes upon the face, and especially when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and if the patient contracts an ulcer so much as his collarbone is contracted, then strain his nose to your left hand, and take out the subtle flame, and strike it in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well in that place, and he will begin to bleed now.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not cut too deeply, and make a clean cut according to your necessity, then bind it for one night, because it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and that is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The disease of the two joints often leads to tightening of the sinew, and at its beginning, it brings on ulceration, and much sickness, and boils, and corrosions, and itching, and ulcers, and lesions.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the qualities of the disease are that if the patient strains his neck away from one and both sides, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and if the master is standing over the patient's head and the patient pricks the vein in a long way just below it, then treats the wound seasonably, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then remake it again in the other vein, then cut off the ligature, and tie on the veins moderately, so that the patient does not choke.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it stay just until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	About the disease of the liver.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sick of the veins of the lips help themselves to coal in the mouth, and to the corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and do not heal.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And if the wound has been healing, then sit down in front of him, and tie his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the hand, and look at both veins, one of which is in the right palm and the other in the left, recognizing them by their black color, and also because there are small black veins around them:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	so that both of them are cut, and if you do not recognize one or the other, and you are in doubt, then cut the larger one from each part, and just like this for all four veins, since it is a same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the sickness in the lower regions of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The diseased veins that are below the tongue aid after the head is cut open, and it is at the constriction of the neck, and with illnesses of the eye, and with illnesses of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and if the patient is skilled enough that he sees the disease take place between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks under each corner at a vein black;
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Healers then both should be called, and do not go too deep in, for these are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the throat which we commonly heal are healed in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or they are pricked with a sharp millet seed, or an olive seed subtle like needles, and it is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are long and subtle according to the size and narrowing of veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of flame mint is very famous and is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	It is necessary to open the vein cheeks that contain flat blood with large visible wounds, and that contain large wounds and trouble.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the shape of a flame olive.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And is more subtle and pointed, and it is for healing the small veins subtly, or there are subtle clots like citrus.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The basilica stain, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are in the throat, and around the neck, and on the chest, and in the stomach.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is suitable for the lord that he applies the application, and that he warms himself from the artery that is under.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and fresh blood comes out, then it is considered to apply stitches, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and let him not prick at the flame, but cut it off as one does with a needle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the gallbladder is not opening visibly, it is advisable to remove it and change another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you want only some of it, or you heal the vein with the same medicine in the arm.
elle apert manifestement;	it opens visibly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and cuts at the flame with a needle, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you see the skin on the vein, it is also advisable to remove the arm, until you know the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the vein of the entrails, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with a needle.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	And beware that you do not strike the artery when you see the swollen limb, for it is of the artery:
eschui la donques.	Choose then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see swelling above as in the urine of a child, and there are no redness or subtlety, know that it is not of the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry up then, and put on your surgical knife lengthwise, then cut open the vein if it is not inflamed, for this happens often;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	if his arm sticks, and leaves it so, and does not move the limb.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let there be fear, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if it is not bound by bandages and he swells up, and you wait for him, and the medicine is not present to him, then strike the artery as soon as it opens, because the head of the joint will retract.
et estainche li sans.	And if he becomes bound by bandages.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a scrape from the fistula, and cut it, and take one of the halves and tie it well onto the other half.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if he is not bound by bandages, that is good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if it is not so, then he must cure him as we have said, with the powders that bind wounds.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the bindings do not cause more harm on those who are subject to small wounds and the swelling of the joint in the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The afflicted vein in the middle is relieved so that it treats wounds of the head above, and wounds below the body, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is fitting for the master that he warms himself in the vein below, and if he cuts too deeply, and he injures the nerve, and it swells, and the wounds become infected, and by chance he cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve is often opened many times, and if it does not open in any man for its subtlety, it is fitting to sanitize the instrument afterwards.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and spare the nerve from your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it with length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The afflicted cerebral vein is relieved, so that it treats wounds of the head, and relieves the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is prudent to heal by pressing on the flame of olive oil or the flame of myrtle, for this is the most safe of all veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	But it is wise to seek the lighter route first, and do not grieve about it if you must try it for the first time, and start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance they swell in some men, but you should not grieve about it the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound is according to your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know is that healing comes only if it serves to preserve health, and to ward off diseases from coming.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the healing be done in one of the three veins that are or cost:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	It's a type of head cold, fever, basil.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and it is prudent to be cautious at the beginning of prayers in June, and in autumn and winter after fasting, when the signs of replenishment appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one must be cautious on the first day or third day after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The cure which is administered for various diseases has no fixed time determined, but it is taken when needed at any hour or in all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not advisable to cure children just before the age of XIII or women who are pregnant only up to the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	It does not suit to heal those who have passed LX years (60 years).
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wishes to be cured by whatever means, it is advisable that he should take a light purgative enema if he has much phlegm retained, so that the veins may carry away the superfluities of pus which are harmful to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	No one will recover if they are too spoiled by meat, or who is drunk, until they become such.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if war has weakened the person after colic, vomiting, and decrease of belly wind, and frequenting woman, traveling, watching, and journeying, and that which weakens all the body, either by something of the arm or through the flesh;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly remove the humors, without excess, by meat and drinks and medicines, if you have one such poison.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then take a bath, if no thing is forbidden, in order to remove the wound, and you will recover from the pain of the vein on the third day, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And keep that day of work free from toil, pain, and luxury, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And be careful and cautious, and let the healthy ones be given precedence over those who are sick, and rub the arm two times or three, then pull out the bandage halfway, because when it is too tight or too loose, it cannot correct itself without.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the affected area with your hands, until the veins swell and you can feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then anoint the healthy ones with a small amount of heated oil, then place your left hand on that vein below the affected area, just enough to stop the blood from flowing and prevent injury.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that are as empty as strings to the seller, and so are those that are full of windiness, so that when one puts flame upon it, it retreats to flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is like these;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if the vein opens up, then it is because the wound is too narrow, for this reason they must be advised on these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens up the first time, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	but if not, then it must be repeated again on the spot or above that point, as soon as possible, unless it inflames.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the wound is inflamed and the patient hopes for it, if they let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	By chance I will come across abscesses.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter the bath, then resume treatment if it pleases;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small or if it has no subtle treatment, and you doubt that it will not spill much blood as you see, then trust in the same wound itself directly.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and if it happens quickly, so that the flesh is inflamed;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	because this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the flesh inflamed, do not resume treatment again, and put a little of lard on it, because it lightens the body with pain, and is soft in this liver that the lard.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus serve the ligament of oil in each wound to heal the veins, so as to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and thus makes a triangle and bowstring from it, when placed on the limb;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if so subtly applied as to be without splinter or when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes a large abscess that has happened many times, namely when the vein is only open at those times or the opening of the vein is small, then you hasten and place on the limb a moist sponge soaked in water and in wool, and restrain it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of the vein's blood, and if it remains on the limb for some days without any inflammation or greenish color, then it will not be harmful;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see it, put on no powder of aloes or myrrh made from camphor, monstrous thing, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times, an abscess and appearance occur in the cavity of the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Put then your hand on it, and if you find the left joint swollen under the pressure of the hand, so is that appearance bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Avoid then that you do not put on any of that which we have said, for in some cases without cutting the artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but apply a plaster of plaster to dry the joint, then heal with another treatment, until it is safe.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And deal with each according to the quantity of their virtue, and the color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if it is not black, let it be left out for as long as it turns red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see a large wound, let him so it is subtle.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too swollen, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	It is best for one who is thin and weak, and needs extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, and apply more ointment.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is best to make him sick less often, and he must be made healthier by cutting across, not pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	This method of healing is safe from bleeding and clotting of nerves, and it's better than the long healing of a small wound or the short healing of a large one.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for one whose fever must be treated with healing, it is best to give them warm milk in the juice of green apples.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	In case of a high fever, apply to the pulse three times or four; if it is of cold complexion, apply a poultice made with warm milk in honey syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, canel, ginger, and cloves, and a well-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If the patient has a wound on his palm, after a great amount of bleeding, it is advisable that he drink a broth of char and a subtle-smelling syrup, and use other things as we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If he is to cut off one arm and heal it again, if this is allowed, when the patient is weakened by great bleeding, it heals little by little, according to the continued power of the virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If he who is to cut off one arm after the first bleeding has strong flesh, it heals in seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the eleventh hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever is to be healed in another part, if it must be healed the next day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For it has much blood within the body which is causing a high fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if it is necessary to apply a large quantity and enlarge the wound so that it fills with blood.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you must reward all the healing conditions and put your hand above some fingers so that death does not come through the wound, for this often happens when a nurse is careless.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not necessary when you see someone releasing their arm, and making the wound bleed again, and if the limb is lost then it must be closed by pressing on the place.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	but if it's bent, then extend the arm immediately, for this would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it stay as long as it heals again;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or point at the tip of the flame, until the vein that was cut has stopped bleeding and you place a poultice made from silk soaked in water, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is sprouted, so let it be and do not strangle it any more, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to treat the wound a second time, then in the same vein as before, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healed in place of the vein on the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the treatment is that the patient puts their hand in hot water, until the pulse is red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Now let my be linked moderately, so that the vein appears well, then let it be healed now through and through, neither too small nor too large.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And let the large ones be cut and let it be healed well near the joint of the hand, so that without any issue, if you put the hand in warm water, and let the wound seep into the water, until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it's in the suppurating state, do not put the hand back in warm water again, because you will make it worse by putting it there.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the health of this vein is more saved from all other veins, than there is no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the little finger of the right hand is worth more than all other diseases of the liver, and it is this way:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Strain the hand, and pour it into hot water, until the vein is cleansed, if you see.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if it turns to blood, and if you cut it the whole length, so that nothing hurts.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not cut too deeply, for the nerves are now exposed and have no covering, and then put the hand back in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and will not come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, then put oil and sinew on the vein to solder it hastily, and do this for each place.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sickness of the sinew in the left hand is worth the disease of the mouse, and do this just as I told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sickness of the spine is worth as much as all other diseases that are in the body, since they are such as those of the mare's, and retention of flowers, and disease of the rains, and of the joints and the legs old, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And cleanse the wound if it is bleeding, and that the patient puts some powder in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it stops, and binds above the joint of the foot.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and if the vein is at the ankle and goes up quite far on top of the foot.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Let the inflammation rise then or if it becomes more swollen at the knee, what does it do?
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you cut on the flesh above the bone, guard well the nails that are beneath, and cut the wound to cross like cutting.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let it be still in its place.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out by itself, he puts the foot in the water, and lets well empty the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the salve is needed for the first time, if it recurs a second time above a little spot, because the liver is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do it similarly with the sponge of the other foot evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The liver of the saddle vein is in the heel of the foot and its wound is worth the pain of the groin, when it is cut.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And if the quality of its salve is such that it enters a vein, and strangles above the knee four times by twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if she opens, so the healthy one in all kinds of ways that you can do it, and through crossing;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and copy its muscles because the limb is swollen, and it is very tight in all directions.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, the healthy one will burst through anywhere near an opening or under a foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the fingers;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and make as much cut at the vein that you see, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it;
ele est maintenant sanee.	it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of wind sickness
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	ventooses are made of horns, or of nails, or of glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and evacuation is done in two manners:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	or by pricking and attracting blood, or by pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this evacuation which is done by pricking also has two manners:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	or it is to all fire, or to fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and evacuation made by pricking and the extraction of blood is done in twelve leagues of the body, so that one may be entirely without flesh on the head.
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are covered with the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two more on each side of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and those beneath the chin.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the winded of the two shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the wound above the groin;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the wounds in both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the wounds in both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the wounds on both heels;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and wounds from the stings of small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and for this reason they do not become inflamed, unless as is done with venous bleeding;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that they be drained, unless by fire or the heat of the senses, in no disease that comes from overfilling, until all the body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if necessity of illness calls for it, or due to custom, then bring each one an hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and every time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are some who, when they need to venesection, have heavy heads;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and to those who experience repletion and redness in their face, and head, and neck, and darkening of the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and to those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and are bleeding.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and to those who are dreaming, and seeing blood and nausea and death-like things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even when it is in its third month, we command to be ventilated after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The sick of the moisture so much hurts the ear ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not good if only this happens after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this ventilation is in place of the head pain, and it is not good for those who have a cold complexion, or who have diarrhea, because it causes great harm to them;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And therefore, it is not good for the old man to use it, or those who have head cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become blind, and for this reason they must put the ventilation instrument a little further down by the doubt of blindness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation on the neck is in place of the head pain and the gallbladder, and because of this, it brings tightness to the breast, tearing of the channel of the stomach, and thirst, and bloating.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it is considered necessary to give more space, because if she holds too tightly, so the bowels become obstructed or the stomach and liver.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The swelling of the lungs when it cost on both sides of the chest causes severe head pain, eyelid swelling and migraine, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is a sign of the sickness of the basilisk;
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is necessary that you command the lord to press his hand on it when it comes, so he does not cut the artery, and does not be present during the bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The swelling under the chin if it is severe causes illness of the mouth, and corrosion of the gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is in place of the wounds on both sides.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders are worth the disease that comes from heat and overcharging.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The lacerations of the cutes (groin area) are valued as much as three veins on the arm, because they cause blood loss from those large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the master to not cut too deeply, for the flesh is thin and he knows beneath (the surface) nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The abscess on the buttock is valued in terms of the hemorrhoids at its foundation, and with diseases (diseases) beneath, it is fitting that the abscess be large and filled with mucus, so as to have need of being properly treated;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and in case it is subtle, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and if I do great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	When the swellings on the legs heal completely, because they attract blood from all the body, and are relieved of old pains in the joints, and the inflammation, and the swelling of the bladder, and they bring down the flowers;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are replaced by the two kneecaps, and the two calf bones, because they weaken the body after long use, and make it come to a more severe condition.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply the swelling is that you put it in first empty, and then as soon as possible, and place it quickly, and move it equally, and do not cease doing so until you see the new redness and inflammation of the wound.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then make it hot, and apply dressings, and take precautions in the arrangement of the bodies, because there are those who have turned to charcoal, and some can bear it better.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	if you must cut only once, and if you must make large wounds, and deep ones.
et suce legierement.	and suck more gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if they are not very large, then you must cut twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to open the way of the great blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	and if they are very thick, then you must cut a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we wish to treat the little blood drops one by one, if we suffer from a single cut.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, then let's continue frequently;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the clot is thick, then cut into it with great force, and when you reach the edge, it's clear that the wounds will be perceived suddenly, and treat those who have thick skin and hard; and who have pores that are easily open, that you anoint them with oil, ventouses ( probably "sponges" or something like a poultice, but I don't know what "ventouses" is supposed to mean), and dissolving.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it's in the violet oil, or in sweet almond oil, or in cucumber seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it's in yew oil, or in cassia oil, or chamomile oil, or anything similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	If the flow is large and cold, you must take turmeric oil, or balm oil, or anet oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	If those whom you have healed with a tender touch and large pores, do not put any oil on them, but rather wash them after the application of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain melon water, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, so they lift themselves from the air, or from water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have great swellings rise from the old wine, or from fresh water, or from decoctions of anise or camomile, or other similar remedies.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and they should not be cured with suction in front of the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and they should not sleep after the suction, and it is necessary to make them warry when they are to be suctioned and when they are swollen.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware those who are sick with colic, and if they are not too swollen and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if they should take cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce at ease, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and let them eat children, and broth of chestnut, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, should drink syrup of honey, and sweet-smelling wine in moderation, eat little, and eat children's flesh, and small birds' meat, and pease.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day he will be vented, should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is convenient to give some food such as tripe or mutton at some houses before the venting, or after, to comfort the main members.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and they should be taken in small amounts, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The ventouses that are applied to cause pain are those placed on the liver, and on the mice, and podagra, and on the stomach, and the bowels, and the joints, and the groin, because these members do not bear to be pierced, unless it is done for a painful symptom in one member, if as we apply the poultice to the breasts when they heal.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	Because of the viscosity that is at the member, as we put ventouses on the belly and on the mouth to reduce the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and cut off the pain, when there is inflammation or stone, so that by its attractive power at random the inflammation goes away, or the stone falls out of place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and so it is done when one places him on the liver and on the gallbladder when there is retained viscosity, and these venthouses are empty only to suck out;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes only with cold water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in such manner that one fills the ventouse with hot water or with it has cooked herbs suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction to be administered with fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And the surgeon takes two fingers of breadth and half a palm deep from top to bottom, and puts one on the costal region toward the middle of an inch, so that he can push a needle in, like placing an arrow, and it should be soft so as not to bleed the patient when putting on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and it has an inch of a crossbar of iron or wood to put a bandage on, and there are large and small ones, as needed for the sickness and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	because the ventouse wounds in children are different from those in old people, and in thin ones than in fat ones;
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And you must then put this ventouse on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	wrap the bandage of wax or linen around the limb and put it inside the ventouse through the crossbar so that the light will be at the bottom of the ventouse, so that it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the member, and place your thumb above the gap where we have said so, so that when you want to pull, if it goes in vapor, and take out the vacuum;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and bind it along the same line as before, and rebind often, if you have need.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the vacuum, which is used for treating diseases of the pleurisy, is given to all that are inflamed, with no thumb or gap, and is applied only when it is filled with inflammation, and placed on the member alone;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	No dressings are applied except in the limbs where one cannot put a vacuum due to smallness, like lips and gums, and similar things;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And when you clean out the chest with charcoal, as two or neither, and similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the qualities of the patient are such that when you find ulcers in waters that are sweet and free from poison, take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And put them in sweet water until they are recognizable and have nothing in their intestines;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then wash with vinegar and antiseptic, then rub the affected area until it is red, and put on ulcers;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are flat and have healed, if it can be done to put a tourniquet, do it, because this is very effective.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the limb high, and then put it in water, much better, and then warm it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the limbs are healthy too soon after the operation, then put on a linen cloth soaked in cold water, and put it on him, until his breathing is stopped.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if his breathing is multiplied, then put on a solution of crushed glass, or vinegar, and similar things, until he stops breathing.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or apply to him moist flesh peeled of snow, and let it sit on the limb until it dries up, if it will stop now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you have more of this matter, take other openings.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the openings do not want to take place, then rub the limb with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until they occur, and then put them on, and immediately when you feel the opening, let it dry.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they bleed, so sprinkle some powder on a little distance and with the broken thread or ash, they will now stop bleeding.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	The book of fractures begins.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, young book, that the leeches from this chapter have never been seen by any of the ancient books, nor do they read any letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason is strange the knowledge in our land, because I have never found a good one.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except by the knowledge of ancient books, for which I have studied so much and treated the science, and through experiment, and from my accustomed life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained here and condensed it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that must be brought, as I did in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we speak in this prologue of the book about the sums of the word and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and keeps it on the virtuous, so that those who have experienced this art noble learn and acquire it, and teach others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a break or dislocation or torsion or any other occurs to anyone, it is fitting to hasten and heal the patient from one part and from another, if no remedy applies, as weak of body, or sick, or old;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if their joints are too stiff, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and if they apply cold remedies, which are cold poultices, and charon of bird and of celery, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not stuff themselves too much with viands that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about a hot abscess or swelling of the member;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient returns to their former good governance, which they have used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to restore themselves, it is fitting that you nourish the patient with foods that cause great swelling, such as those which have a lot of viscosity, like bread cooked in water, and risotto, and testicles, and pork fat, and oysters, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	Because the swelling causes more sprains and sooner the break.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of old and aged do not heal well again nor can they be soldered according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, neither those which are too tender, just as the bones of young children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but there is no cure, if you apply the broken bone to a large tendon that holds together and joins the limb in one piece, until it heals as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and not to its full strength, and for this reason they must be nourished with large foods, just as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And finds that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all sorts of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that grow inward, and others that grow outward, just like the thickness of a hairpin to write with.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture with just a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each method has its own instrument and proper equipment for the restoration, according to what is remembered in its place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that bone fractures are recognized by the fact that the limb is twisted and open badly due to lack of use, and it feels painful on the presser of the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no tortuosity or lump at the joint, and the patient feels no great pain, if there is not even a break.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can still have some degree of tortuosity, or a small crack.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not suitable for you to move your hand, but apply medicines that come after this, and then restrain now with subtlety.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And knows that the break that occurs in the arm, and are the two parts of the joint, he must now put them on an equal basis, so that the abscesses do not come.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if the cauls come, he must leave one day, until the abscesses are laid to rest;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then he puts him on the muscle where you can easily and carefully fix it, and knows that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those in which there are pieces;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if you separate them into two parts, whether it's between the hands or fingers, or on the palm of the hand, or at the wrist, or one cord and on the hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are reduced, you reattach by all means possible in their proper place, and avoid that through your work the patient comes to have an additional injury or pain.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and put the two bones together in the best forms possible.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And he feels well with his hand if you think he is not feeling well:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If the dressing is made well, and he is not strained too much, nor pressed so as they who do this work make his blood hot and contraction to the member, just as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is set to right, instruct the patient well that he does not move, nor watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And take care that the limb is so fixed that he does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, it is not yet in its proper place, and therefore you should put him into this certain condition that he does not feel any pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And keep him straight so he is set correctly, lest twisted movements occur when it is restored again;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb will be as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Things which the member is broken are various in size and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers.
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	so it is convenient to wrap bandages of linen soft and subtle;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those which are large, such as thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	so it is convenient to wrap with a strong and thick rope, for the large ropes embrace the entire limb, and tighten it equally in all parts, so that there is no gap.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then bind with light straps, three turns or four according to the limb, and tighten with one hand all around the rope, then go up to the break and tighten it less than the break so that the break will soon move a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the joint little by little, until you press a great part of the healthy limb, then take another ligament, and turn it inward toward the broken limb.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go back to the lower part of the break, and hold it firmly but not too hard or too soft, as we have said before;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put linen rags or bandages between the ligatures until they are all even, then tie everything with an upper band, and then put your well-made stitches on top, if there is an abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if it has inflammation or an abscess, put on soothing ointment to the affected area, and what removes the inflammation, let it stay for some days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Pursue a tight grasp upon your joints, and let them be of the size of a wide cane resounding, or of wood from which pliers are made, or palm tree shavings, and let them conform to this form:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is fitting that the joint placed on the break be slightly larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and so large as it should be, for the length of the small or great limb;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then tie the joints in such manner as you did on the first incision, then tie above with an arrow-shaped thread, as you did on the first incision over the break;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the narrower it is, the worse.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is fitting that the thread be fine, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For the big nails, as I have seen in works of fools who make their clothes with twisted threads of linen, and it is a great error, because the nail can not be even if it is too subtle, and it should not be more than two fingers' breadth between each nail.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	If the patient is wounded by arrows after an injury, then tie off those places with linen or woolen strips so that they do not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a break and the joints are fractured, I will say this treatment after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to tighten the arrows on all members, even the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to put nails forward less than five days or seven, or more according to your safety after the incision that follows.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and thus here is the way of ancient embalmers to restore breaks, dislocations, and twisting.
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and thus you take flour that remains on the walls of the mill, and mix it with a great amount of water, and put this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, into use, for it is the common way of the embalmers to restore breaks in many situations, and especially in women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of plastering restores the break and the dislocation and the twisting:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take a mixture of resin, linseed oil, and gum arabic and apply it to an area X.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Glass and aloes, applied to area V.
alechil VIIII З.;	Alechil (likely a type of plant) for the seventh day.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make powder from flaxseed and mix it with honey.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the complexion of the humours is hot, apply this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, but at the risk of many deaths.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of plaster that is valuable for twisting.
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take care of and examine; for the child is Z.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Mercury and aloes, for seven times nine.
acaice VI З.;	Asa six.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Onice Arabic ten Z., and brews well, and confits with water or honey, and administers.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way to splint is when you use sticks and set the bones straight, and ease the following pain, and cut with the bone, and fracture.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Apply linen cloth, and poultice of mold in oil cooked, and put on the limb.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not heal, but they are good for soothing abscesses and properly placing bones, the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to splint that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Burn the leaves of dried figs and earth leaves, and crush them together, and make paste.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to treat a plaster for the healing of a bone fracture and to relieve swelling from an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of violets, chamomile, flowers of violetts, wheat flour, from each one a part.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	And crush it and mix with wine, and apply to the limbs that are heated; or mix with moist coriander water, or water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to treat is stronger than the first, when an abscess comes back to restore the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take root of violets, and sesame seed, balsamum, meletemne, and without succa, and flowers of violets and chamomile from each one a part.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	And crush it and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Iporas writes in his book that you should not put broken bone on the limb to restore it, rather, one should use a mixture of cerote made from wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between too hard and too soft.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one must place the broken limb on high in order to restore, using dry things moistened with hot stuffs, such as myrrh and aloes and incense, just like we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way of treating an abscess is worth its pain and suffering:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mutton or horse flesh, or nails of birds, and vermilion, and cut them evenly, and pound them, and make it into an ointment, and apply to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then lay the wound open a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, or has his bones in their proper place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if you do not lay it open by skilled hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the wound, or it pricks, with rest or swells, then hurry and lay it open, and apply the ointment now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a lighter cloth, and a sponge moistened with seawater, and plunge into the water, and lift up the wound until the itching ceases, and the pain is alleviated;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Instruct the patient to leave the limb rest for an hour, then place it under a dry cloth, moistened in water or oil rose, and tie it up with a bandage until you are sure of the wound's size.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	And let the inflammation rest on the limb, and try to remove the pain, then resume gentle cutting, a little emplastre, and do not strain it too hard as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and very gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess swells and is red and painful and inflamed, I have already treated it by draining and stitching, just like I did before when the pain came on.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if the limb does not come to anything of what we have said, do not untie it unless after 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and at no time let it stay for 20 days, as one sees, until the fracture is set, and approaches the healing of the bone above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	And therefore you must restrain it more than once, and swell the meat around it, as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the liver drying more than it should, know that it will not come to pass.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then it arises from a hot cold fever, every time you dissect, and this be the case for all alike, one day after another.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	therefore cut the nerves in the limb, and immediately stop what is done by the foolish surgeon, lest they return the limb twisted.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	this is bad, and if it's due to fear, and I see no other thing but that one should loosen and straighten it directly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	From diverse ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many kinds of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are predetermined.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	there are fractures that are caused by the blow of a sword, and the collarbone ossifies all the bone below the fractured surface, just as it is compressed or shattered.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason it is called a "haicheure" fracture.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	when the sword strikes the bone from underneath in order to pierce it, and this is called an "absolute" fracture.
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and there are two kinds of wounds for these fractures, great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impact into a hollow space, or tearing, or fracture of the bones by stone, or through the bone on stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has an open fracture which is near to the bone under the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is either great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	and if the wound is closed in the bone as subtly as we cut hair, and there is a small split, then this fracture is called "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	If the wound is made or by hitting with a stone, or by falling, or by some similar thing, and it causes a piece of bone to fall into the wound, and the hairs are as they were when the cauterist was firing the cauldron over the cauldrons;
si entre li piere dedens.	If a stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often in those who have moist bones under their head, like children's skulls;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and occurs in all such fractures where small pieces are separated like stones.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak on his behalf.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And know all kinds of fractures by the removal from them, and the inquiry has been tried, and by the corrupt flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of the hair is known by this: that when one discovers the bone and strokes on top of it, if the fracture opens.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be careful for all accidents in the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, fever, eyes turning red and swollen, and other similar signs, then it cannot be cured without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no extraordinary accident and you expect a good outcome, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the sickness comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is fitting to take out the bone before the fourteenth day at night when you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	But if it is in this state, then hastening to take out the bone before the seventh day, will only make the skin below the bone corrupted, and accidents that we have described will come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the bone fracture comes just to the skin covering the brain, then you must break the fractured part like this:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And take the head of the sick person, and cut open on the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound as well as you can, because if there is a discharge of blood, it comes when uncovering the bone or abscess; and as much as possible aid with what is needed, and fill the hole with moist cloths in oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and make sure there is no discharge of blood.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to remove the bone, and this is done in two different ways.
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one way is that you copy the narrow cutting before, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then after this treatment, a more severe amputation is performed than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second manner is that you have many kinds of knives, some are thin and others are wide, and they should be pointed and made of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And when you cut lightly, so that you do not hit the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and thick, it is necessary that you pierce through it, so that with knives you administer them carefully, not piercing too deep, lest the blade go beyond the bone into the flesh, and should have a margin or a circle around the point, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and it is necessary to have many of them, so that each one comes into its own place at the spine of the bone, so that you should have knives for every part.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of the three kinds of trephines:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	Those that pierce through the broken bone should place one trephine on the bone and turn to both sides until you see that the bone is pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then put the trephine on another part after a little while, and do this all around, then make cuts in the bone's space between the perforations, and do it more subtly than you can, gently, just like we said, until you pull the bone to your hand or one of the instruments you have, such as pliers, pincers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and be careful not to touch the brain or the skull.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and made cuts, if there is something left on the bone that remains from another instrument similar to an incision, but it is necessary that it be more delicate and subtle than those other incisions.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if it does not heal after a few days of small bones or scales, if the bone is lightly damaged in the joint.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound with stitches and bandages as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And other ways of work are those that the Galenians say are more accurate;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and this is their strong word, and it is their saying.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary to uncover a part of the bone, in that place where the break opens up, so that when you have uncovered that part, you put under the head of this incision a lens-like shape, because it is this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut it from one side, and if the affected part is two sides, so that the cutting is against the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then use a small hammer above, so that you strike the bone lightly all around, and be well guarded with the cloth underneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	She should be burned at the bone, very lightly, because feeling the pain well, and fearing.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone is not pierced through the cloth until now and only the top part of it is struck so that small pieces form, then cover with the roughness again and remove the scales at the razor-thin sharpener which you must have in various amounts to provide for each person what seems most convenient according to their work and figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have before many rough razors, and after subtler ones, and do not cease to do this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other types of hair cuts and subtle breaks, it is necessary to apply care according to its nature;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this is something that has no answer for him who put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary to pour oil of roses on it according to its quantity, and moisten it with linen cloth;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled in two or three and moisten it with wine and oil of roses, and put it on the first cloth;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do what is easier than you can, so that you don't strain the liver, then serve it again under another link, and do not stretch it further except when the wound heals by itself;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it remain like that on the first or second day, until the swollen part is alleviated, then remove it, and administer medicines such as wild garlic, flour of bees, powder of incense, and herbs, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and make a powder of these things, and put it on the wound, and administer medicines to heal by bleeding.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and make sure the wound is thoroughly cleaned, so that you don't leave any discharge, and don't leave it with a bow (a protective covering), for when the bow comes together over the scalp cloth, it can cause blood to run and bring great harm to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	For when you put above something sharp, he will pierce through.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful whether they will doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if it does not come from the fire that we have placed on it, so that its virtue has effect, you must press a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in vinegar made into a cloth, and put it on the sharp thing.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of this kind should be done to him, until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that the two bones above are never broken, or one alone, for they are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and that below is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, so it is fitting that you poke your little finger or puncture into the wound, and put equal that break inside your thumb, and in a pouch as needed, until the blood returns according to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do it gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the bone and it cannot be returned to its place, so that you put a small peg into the head of a nail.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is of two parts, so do it again, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is appeased, then poke with a needle into the wound, and cover the head with linen drapes, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	When you put something else in its place, if it is broken.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And let the tents be so thick that they fill in the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And doctors said that you should moisten the swellings in butter, and move each one every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to be the best thing to me, but it is advisable that they are moist in the making of auburn and powder of flour;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then let the tent stay until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And never put in or nose plugs made of goose fat in its place, and if the wound is deep and wrapped tight, and it holds the dislocation, and blows into the patient.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	if you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	If the abscessed joint comes near while you are working, then put some cold or moist cloth in oil or rosewater, or apply a poultice of dung.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if there is no abscess, then apply plaster by omission, made from flour of suture, and powder of incense, mixed with wine vinegar, and put on light spoons, and do not bind the nails.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the fracture of the nail is small, and it is fractured into small pieces, then take out the splinters that are convenient to do so, and sew the wound, and apply plasters and ointments that are suitable for this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it has no wound within the nail, then treat the nail, and apply poultices of onion, until he is cured.
de la routure de la mandibule	About the fracture of the lower jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the lower jaw is fractured without any open wound, and there is only a bruise inside, without breakage in two, but only a slight separation of the cheekbone, if one weighs lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is fitting, if the fracture is in the right hand, that you put your index finger into the mouth of the patient;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	In case of the broken jaw on the left side, put your right thumb into the break and gently push it inside, and press with the other hand without force, and tie an even knot.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the lower jaw is displaced in two parts, it is necessary to manage the extension of two parts until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	If the movement of the teeth happens or a fracture occurs, where there's a strain from a thread of gold or silver or silk, then apply to the broken jaw a layer of ceramic and a double cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And put on the double cloth an even-sized big nail well-made or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it above where you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and serve light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the swelling changes, and he lays on it for three days, then puts it back to what is changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And apply plaster on it, with powder from the mill, mixed with a lot of water or flour of sement, after you have cut out the wound;
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and apply a lighter layer of plaster, and if the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, let him remain until he is cured;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times they are healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	If an abscess comes to a head, then follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	and if it has a fracture and a wound together, remove as much of the bone as is exposed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if the removal of the bone is subtle and conveys no dangerous consequences.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, then enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have removed all these bone pieces, and it does not stay in place, apply the wound dressing, if it is large, and put on suitable poultices according to that, in order to heal the wound.
de la forcele	of the fistula.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The fractured bone is forced further multiple times in the shoulder region, and the fracture occurs according to three kinds:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	When it is broken and split in two, and has pieces, and is lighter to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	when there is a break with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the injuries are when the break is with an injury, that you have two ministers, one of whom will hold the arm because of the bruised break;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then puts equal the break on both, so that the form becomes as it should be, and there is no appearance or swelling.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you have to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a rounded spear of cloth, or linen, and so thick as your necessity requires;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and let it heal, and strain the bowstring to your hand, so that you tie the break in equal parts, as is fitting.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you cannot treat the head of the pain in front because it comes from within, so that the patient lies on his back, and put a pillow under the shoulder, and pour the medicine down the throat, until the bones of the pain are lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then direct the break to your two sides, and if you find a suitable splint, tie it up as much as possible;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and bring the lighter pieces together, and if the bone cannot be joined in any way, then cut at one of the joints you have made;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but so that you put on beneath this instrument a safeguard to protect it;
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it resembles a spoon, and is not made of wood, and be as long as you need, according to the size of the bone and the work.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	And if two heads are broken, so that you see them, and one is large and the other is narrow, as is the way of the wound that you have made when treating the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of a bone being broken, if the wound cuts, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt that the bone is broken, then apply the wound with strips and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess forms on your flesh, then apply rose oil, asbestos, and vinegar to it, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The straining of the bone, when it is near to wounds and swelling, is that you place on the bone powdered flour from the mill, and aloe ash, and put lightweight cloths over it, and put a spear underneath, if you have need.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very thick bandage of palm leaf width, and put one double drap over it, and the poultice;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a thin needle of three inches long and broad, and pass it through the bend of the bone, so that the head of the bone is still there.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and put the needle on the fracture, and turn the bend of the bone up towards the neck, and below the healthy part, and below the diseased part;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and tie off from each part, and when you see that the ligament is holding the fracture in place, and you see clearly that the needle does not move over the fractured bone, then repeatedly reward it each day, and when the ligaments are tightened, restrain them;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the broken place, to lift the joint upwards;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	If the arm is made to heal by stretching the shoulder, or you tie the arms to the neck, and do not untie yourself in case of a bad accident, it will be sound after twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then resume the plaster, if you see that it needs it, bind it and leave it in that way until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And it will be restored by the thirty-eighth day, and less than a few men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the shoulder break
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	But it often happens that the shoulder breaks or is twisted in some way, and does not heal unless through its own movement.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	so arrange the limb according to its own shape and form, and reset it in all ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then put powder of the mill on the wound with a large amount of oil, and light blows, and place above it an adhesive bandage.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then puts on a large and subtle needle, slightly larger than the shoulder, and sews under the skin of the shoulder in any part, so that the needle cuts evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then tightens it to a great band firmly, so that the needle does not move from its place, and examines the stitch every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time it is applied, so tighten the band, and place the needle as if it were in its proper place, and put the patient on their chest.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder is restored in twenty or twenty-five days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is fulfilled, release the dislocation, and be sure, for it's not that the bone will move lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if one piece of bone is pushed forward and does not adhere to the wound below, then raise it up, and the bone, and do as we have said in soothing an abscess with great heat.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the foot.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The flesh is broken at no time in its middle, but it happens occasionally;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it breaks often without warning.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, so that it inclines downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of feeling, and swelling, and sometimes vomiting blood, and in order to open up the marrow in the broken bone, and the sensation is much worse.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that when the patient rises from his bed on both sides, and he puts this cloth between his shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the two breastbones with your hands, and skillfully places equal between all the ways you can, until the figure of the bone becomes as it should.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then puts over the joints and the fragments of bone on a subtle layer of salt, or of another lighter material, and wraps it up in one piece, and ties it to the bone so that it doesn't move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	And turn the round link to the back, and bind it immediately, and reward each hour the limb, and if she relaxes, then bind.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	But if he wishes to release it, because of corrosion or itching that comes on the limb, or pain or abscess, if one hastens, and releases it, and scrapes away the pus, and addresses those who have come from various treatments;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then scrapes away the pus, and binds it so that he becomes whole.
de la brisure des costes	of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the fracture of the ribs comes only after a large amount is taken away from the back, and towards the head inside, because they are brittle.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and this feeling is good for an investigation as should be.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the remedies are such that you must put the fracture back, as it seems fitting.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply plaster, and tie with a splint, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the break of the ribs is slanted inward, he feels the patient great pain and point, just like from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the cloth;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and he is filled with pain and pus, and swollen and vomiting great plant of blood, and it is from bad health, and the old men have put great effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who claim it is suitable to administer foods that swell the belly in order to push the fracture into its place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this unless an abscess has come from a burnt flesh.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then cut it out.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And said none of us that you should put vinegar on the flesh, because it will cause wounds, and it is like reason;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	but doubt remains that the vinegar will not attract the exudates to the flesh because of the weakness of its constitution.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that one must cover the limb with a moist linen in hot oil, and place tentes ( probably a type of bandage) between the ribs to make the wound even, then treat with the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot suffer from the bone which pierces the cloth, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is fitting to split open the ribbed part of the broken costal, and it is fitting to put certain instruments to ward off the wound.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must pierce the bone, and treat lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and heal with poultices, until it is cured.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if an abscess comes to a head, put moist cloths in olive oil on it, and apply heat.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until the abscess is gone from the area where it occurs, and if there are ulcers on the surface of the wound or wherever it must be cut into, until it is cured.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Never occurs a fracture of the collarbone and there has been no collapse.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it happens that he cannot tell if he will be sane or not, take care and see if you notice these signs: when his hands are soft and swollen and lifeless, and cannot move nor stretch, and when you poke them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that he is mortal in these other dispositions, and if he is mute and feels well when you restrain and press him, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will recover, if you put them on treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it will heal or not, take care if the vertebrae are softened, and if the wound is in hands, and on the back there may be a great falling out, and an emptying with a violent want.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when one has soiled it under his belly, he vomits without voluntary will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he becomes aware of it on his back and tries to relieve himself, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that they are fatal.
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	unless it is treated with special care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if such an accident does not happen to him, then it is a lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the cure is that if there is an abscess hot, you put oil of roses or oil of mustard seed on it, until it becomes calm.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then puts on one of the plasters comfortable and drying, and ties it with a bandage, and instructs the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and does not lie on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if some bone has been broken, it is advisable to cover the wound;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then take out the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if they are large, with a seam, then apply the dressing and tighten bandages tightly, until it is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the bone of the bone is broken, which we call "chiese of la kowe", then pour some wine from your left hand into a pouch, and place it equal to the other hand on your palm, then apply plaster and stake above, if you have need.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then tie it up, and if it has bone exposed, make it above, and the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the femur
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It rarely happens that the bone of the hindleg is broken, and if it has, then there would not have been for a little bit of relief to the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and let it grow long, and draw back to the paraders, and comes to the patient pain in the shoulder, and joint, and swells what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And if you are restored to health, then stretch out your hand above, until you reach the break.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and sees which is the break and the form of it;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the break is only in the head, then straighten that broken limb, until it has returned to its natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or declines inward, so that it points to the inside, have the patient lie on his stomach, until the restoration of that fracture becomes apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have straightened it, then apply plaster, and put on a splint of wood or horn, and bind the break so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and apply the plaster under the ribs, until the limb is straightened.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	If an abscess comes to a head it must be touched gently until the abscess is allayed, and apply what we have said previously.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	And then return to restoration, and bind as necessary, if there is no further injury.
et c’est li maniere.	and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The joint is that which is between the sleeve and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of the two manners:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	whose one is that you take a flat piece of bone, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And hold both joints in place with two ties, and set them above the patient on a seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Now the joint is broken in the shoulder, so let it lie still until it comes to an assembly, and take out a piece of bone from the shoulder, then put upon any weighty thing or let the minister extend it below.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then put the splints in the breakage equal to its joints, so that the breakage returns when it is suitable.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that you must put the patient above his head, and tie his neck, then command to two ministers who one holds the thing that is on the breakage in their hands, and the other holds below all the ligature, and each of them extends it to his part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then tie the ligature below the breakage, and above the breakage, and extend each of the ministers to his part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, so it is fitting that you put one linen under the assembly, and the other towards the joint, under the breakage;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and if the breakage is towards the joint, so it is fitting to put one linen lightly, with ease, until the breakage becomes even on its place and on its joint;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	the fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if the abscesses come, do not strain them again for seven days, and put on a linen bandage soaked in oil rose, until the abscesses are eased.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then strap it, and the way to strap it so that you put plaster on the break, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the side.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put the bandage on, and strap it onto the shoulder, and onto the arm, so that the arm is in its place, if no other thing prevents it, or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use stakes, and place one larger and stronger stake on each break, and set them apart by two spaces, and so that each stake is as large as it can pass through the break at three points of each side;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then pull out the stakes, in the same way as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break, stronger and less constricting.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the position of the stakes and the constriction, just as we have said, in the place where you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess there, leave it tied for seven days, just as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	then look at each one of them three days after the tie, to see if it prurites or swells up, and there is no discharge in the limb, or a pus forms that cannot come out because it is too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is true, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents happen to him, then do not free his limbs until after three days or more, and the patient should lie on his back, and have his hands above his stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	And place this cushion under the injured arm so that it is smooth and even, and watch each hour of the day or night whether the figure of the broken limb moves, or if the ties are loosened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it appears by the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat which we have placed in front of you, in such a manner that the meat is at room temperature.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when he begins to regain his appetite, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the arm and the leg are to be put back in place after forty days of treatment.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then so he must be untied and given a bath and administered medicine for the wound to heal.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is tight and swollen, so it stays tied for three days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of a broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "scapula", one small and that is where the pocket.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and that is under, towards the small shoulder;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Sometimes it breaks only the large scapula or only the small one, and sometimes both join together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small scapulas are broken, restoration is light and healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large scapulas are broken, healing is poor, and more grievous than when both are fractured together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small fossicle that is broken alone, then it must be extended lightly and put back in place.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it's a large swelling, then they must strain it more strongly;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and stretch it out to the extent of its swelling, and pull up the pouch of his hand higher than others, and lower his fingers more below those of others, so that he crosses himself on him himself, and stretches out above it even more, so that the patient suffers no pain at all;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then stretch the minister's other arm to the part below his hand, or near his joint, and another minister on the other side above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put him on equal ground, in his best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is no matching piece that can be held close to the joint, and you cannot restore it to its proper place, then fix it with bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if it's with a break and an injury, I have spoken to the singular surgeon;
si pren la cure.	so take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the restoration, a piece of flesh falls away from bone, then apply to it a plaster made of cerote, oil rose, and white wax so that it is neither too hard nor too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And let the surgeon take care of it gently from above, so that the abscesses are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then take the bone and apply plaster made from powder of wheat flour mixed with a great deal of water; put the splint on it, so that the splinter of the fracture is straighter and slightly more forward than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and he knows that he must have six splints or an increased number of arrangements:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	or if the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and bind more tightly above the fracture than elsewhere, and always less when applying it, as I said at the beginning of this chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and that the dressings above the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or harsh;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let it be the children, from which it is strained, of linen, neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the joint after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if some bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is suitable to raise the limb in cold water until the itching is soothed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be tightly pressed down to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the tightening, and if the joint is loosened and the bone is separated, and it seems like a similar thing, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the numbness persists and cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then it is fitting that you loosen it a little, and let it stay like this for some days, until the numbness goes away, and then tighten it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if any of these things do not happen to the patient, so that they are freed after twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	until, then put the hands on his neck, and so that his necks are even, and guard against movement and trembling, and sleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the composition and the constitution of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the hand break
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand there is a small amount of breakage, and it comes but pain many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the finger of the hand is broken or bent, it is wise for the patient to tie a cross on it, and sit straight in front of it equally;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then places his hand on the broken joint, and stretches out the limbs of the broken bones, and sets them even and square until they are well set;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and applies plaster and bandages, if there is no abscess, then he puts in a stake according to the quantity of the wound;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and should be wrapped with an i-draped linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is at the tendons near the belly of the finger, he makes a bandage-stick, and instructs the patient to tie it around his broken finger;
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then strain of a long thread, and if the limb is bound tightly as big as the thumb of the hand, and the binding, just like it should.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the breakage is in the fingers, it is advisable to place an arrow above and another below on the foot, so that the fingers are covered and straightened; then tie all around the hand, and bind the ligament between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	and if the fracture comes to any of us, then that is bound tightly, if it is done well so as to be equal, just like it should.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and the binding with the palm, and if you see that it binds a small pin straight to lift the fracture, and does not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is on other joints, just like it is in the index or one of the others, so that it is done well and he binds with the healthy joint which is after.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you bind them all at once in a single tie, what value is it, or you put on a pin, just like if they were bound.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And be wary in the restoration and arrangement of an abscessed place, and heal those who come to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	The part of the bone breaks.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the collarbone is often broken, and one can see it when they turn in front and behind.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	And the restoration is done by linking the above to the broken bone, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patients lie on their face, then stretch out each of these limbs equally.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and it is when the bone is mended into place.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the joint of the bone, then it's one of the bands to the point of the finger, and the others below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is proximate to the groin, and then there should be the ligaments of the groin, and the extension below.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	The patient should put the mirror on the equal bone to its two hands, so that it is according to his natural figure; and then apply plaster, and tie, so that the abscess does not come again.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if it has an abscess on the same place, let him allow it to be soothed and then return to its original state and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary to wrap above the break with a bandage that is twice or three times wrapped around, and then let the swelling stay for a while, then turn the leg so that the toes reach the root of the nail, and tie a long thread between the thigh and leg, under the knee, and tie the calf tight with a thread from below, and wrap the top with thread.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn on the knee and on the thigh the bandage, then put a bandage on the bruised place, and put an arrow on the bone of the knee;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then apply the knee bandage eight times between the thigh and the fold of soft cloth to secure equal tension, then begin to tie a bow figure III or IV on the bruised place;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and the more you pull up on the bruised place, and less the bandage will be tight.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then hold both two joints of the thread that you have tied between the knee and thigh, then tie three more arrows above, before going back down to the head of the thread until you reach the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and if it does not move from its place, then leave it as is, because there will be no abscess or swelling or other similar signs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if this happens, if it dislocates, and addresses itself as we said before, just as we have explained many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of bone that hold it, then you must fix them, if possible;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if you cannot, then it is necessary to break the limb and treat it.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and the treatment as we have said, until he becomes healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And there is no time when the cartilage is broken as we have inserted needles, just like in the shoulder and arm.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	because all the restorations done will not close the wounds of the patients.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And the bone is restored in three days, or a little less or more, according to the diversity of the complexion.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the femoral channel
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	The body of a child has no fracture, but it often bends.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, but is only a crack or split, and has pain to the wound and the flesh, and it hurts very.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is done as we put equal what was rough on its surface, until they are assembled what can be.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Now put the plaster on it, and put a round stake in it, if you need to, and bind it as it should be, then reward all the arrangements that we have said about other breaks, just like an abscess is hot and another similar thing.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you put it on each individual case that he thinks so, until they are healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg fracture
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Knowing that in the leg there are two bones, so one is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile";
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and it happens that all other breakages are as when it comes to the arm, and for this reason is the restoration like the same arm, and the work is all in one. And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg of every part.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, so turn it before.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, it feels great pain, and he sees it well;
et torne desoz.	and turns around.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	And therefore straighten the extension, and put it equal, and tie the strings equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but it is necessary that the broken piece be small and lighter than the extension;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and align it according to its virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed all your work, take two strips of cloth that are red and purple which stain the leg from one side to the other, and be long enough from the knee down to the bottom;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap in two strips of cloth one on top and one on bottom, and tie them in the middle so that the leg cannot incline to the right or left, and thus it is good;
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And none of them have taken care to treat the long swelling of the leg, and if it has burst open, and they put the leg in a binding garment to prevent movement, and doing this properly is done in the break where it has injured.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	And move each person every day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	So that the patient becomes sane.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the bone fracture of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle does not come to a break, but sometimes the bone of the foot breaks and sometimes it is bruised, and there is no force required except for shock at other dislocations.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if he has a broken bone in his foot, and you see the bones protruding one over the other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he were walking, and then place your own foot upon his, so that the bones are raised, and press hard until they realign themselves in their proper place.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Instruct the patient to apply plaster and bandages on that area; and place on the lower belly of the foot a small plate with two holes for the fingers, then bind the foot at the ankle, then when you have wrapped the strips around, and other things necessary.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, if you release the bandage, because you will find that the bones are even, whether they are broken, or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if they are any broken bones that need to be reset, just like we said the bones of the hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then put the broken bone in a splint according to the length of the two bones, and make it slightly larger; then bind with the foot that plate I mentioned earlier.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, put one splint on each bone according to its size, wrapped in the first strip of linen, and bind with that plate over the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and when standing on the top of the head of the table so that his belly is exposed under the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	and it is also necessary to remember all the other things I have said about other fractures.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each case as it may seem appropriate.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the fracture of a bone at the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the woman’s bones are broken, so that she becomes enlarged, then incline her to the part of her back, and hold her behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the wound with the nature of the patient’s cloth, and put also a large amount as in the stitch.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then bind the woman, and lift her back little by little, and then sew the cotton until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and brings its bone with the stitch.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wants to pee, so loosen the cotton, and when she has peed, put it back again, and do this seven days or more:
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If the break is restored, and you see, take a vessel of wool, and tie it to the puncture with a string, and pour all the vessel into nature:
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow through the string that forms, until the vessel is sucked inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	nature will restore the break;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then be filled with cotton, and let it so for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone at the shoulder joint of a man or woman is broken, or the bone of the hare, restore it in the same way as we have said about the bone of the hare:
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and are not hidden from those who apply their study and use, and they heed my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fractures mean more suffering in the right path of restoration:
enten le donques.	and therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the vagina, when it is fractured, take an owl's beak and insert it into the vagina.
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap linen bands around, and let it remain for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breaks with wounds.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for him who has a break with a wound, especially if it's great, so that the bone of the shoulder or arm joint, or similar, is set now, if what we have said testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	If the wound is clean, then apply the vinegar again, if you have nothing else, then restart the healing process in that same hour or the following day, unless an abscess comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If an abscess comes, then wait until the next day to restart the healing process, up until the abscess is calmed down, and do not touch it again on the third or fourth day, for you will bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the broken bone appears near the joint discovered, it is to be put at a gentle point on your fingers, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the splint is not provided for placing equal to your hands, since this instrument made of iron with seven or eight fingers, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this reason it is a master's work that must be done by three or four, as needed in each type of fracture;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and it should be small and thin enough, so that when compressed against the limb at its location, it does not bend;
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And is called "palanche", because the curved metal is placed on top of the visible bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and after one turn, so that they are even with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	But if the break is subtle and the splints cannot grasp the bone properly, it is advisable to copy the skull bone, so that the splints have hold of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	But if you cannot put the bone back in its place, as we have said, then make the cut with an instrument suitable for it, whether sharp or dull.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then take what is remaining in the bone, of sharpness and of small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is set and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that he is not in his natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	So that it is in its place, then make a hole in the tied rope in vinegar black and proper, as this is what it should be.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	And do not put any cream or other thing on the wound with oil, lest it bring rot and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then administer ointments as you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the covering all over, according to the quantity of the wound, and be sure well that the wound is not bound with the break.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And many times have these fools done this, and brought the patient to death or corruption at least once;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And let the strainings be more gentle and softer than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that more accidents will happen as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, do not put up with this, instead.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap it tightly, in place of the splint, with hard bandages and tie.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after the first day or second day that the bow has healed to the wound, so know what you have put on top of it all wine, and apply the ointment healing wounds, just as ointment of four parts and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is fitting that you dislocate the limb a second time every day, morning and evening, until it is softened and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is fitting that the limbs be dressed in a certain way so that the bow heals along the leg more lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the wound opens again every day and it cannot heal but falls apart bow, see how small pieces of bone there are, for that's why you should cover the wound with a poultice, and remove all those pieces which cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	If an abscess comes to the leg or in another manner of corruption, then it is fitting that you cure it, according to what he advises in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	But if the bone is broken and protrudes through the limb, as it does with the arm or shoulder, and other large limbs, do not treat it yourself, for many times one dies, but allow it to heal by itself.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	by chance you will die after twenty or thirty days from the wound, then treat the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, then let her go.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of wounds that come on from a boil.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	we come many times after the health of the fracture, especially when it's near the joint, and behold what a thing to see is the form of the limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance may not be able to do the limbs their natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Be cautious therefore if it is fresh.
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if he administers medicinal drugs such as aloes, incense, and mirrors, and saffron, and myrrh, and similar things, insofar as you have none of these things, or all together, and confound them with a mixture of vinegar or wine, or oil.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and put it on the nose in poultices, and strain well, and do not loosen it with your hands for a day.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	And then dislocate again, and repeat it so often until the knots are removed;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you strain on a flat bone that is well done;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	because the property of the flat bone is that it removes all swellings over the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the knot is turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, so that the wound above, and the apparent superficiality.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you return to it without rasp, until it is removed, and the cure until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A limb that is weak after childbirth.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the bone break is restored and stays after the weak and subtle limbs, if it happens for many reasons;
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	For why one is so bound, because he was too tightly tied, and not so tightly bound as it should be.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because he had too many ties, and the swollen part cannot come to the member.
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or for too many swellings;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of too great movements, neither in its hour.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because he has little blood in his body, if it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is to make the patient eat less and make his body soft, until there are multiplied in him.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer a bath, and do to the patient joy and amusement;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Then put powder on the limb, so that the powder attracts the great swelling, and the joint rises frequently from the painful water, until the swelling subsides.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	One de la main after the health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the member is ugly all over, then do not try to restore its natural shape.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	if you do not believe the foolish people who say that one must break a limb all new every time, and many fools have done this in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this kind of work is blamed, and great harm comes, and by chance one dies.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	If the nodulations and tortures are fresh, then it is advisable to let them arise from hot water, or to cook herbs like violets, roots, and malloloth, as if they were of wormwood, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	And make the flesh softening like aqua fortis, as it is done, and take the wormwood mucilage, and confection with honey or sesame oil, and make it soft again;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or take grease figs, and grind them with wheat flour, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no joint is straightened by constant and prolonged friction with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And make the joint move every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the tortuousness is hardened and hardened, like stones, and needs treatment with hot oil, if you choose to apply it to the bone, at the subtle incision.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put a bandage and study the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs for no apparent reason, if you think now is the time to restore it properly.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	But if delayed, the swelling increases, and by chance it is put back in place at pains.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	because one should not move the swollen part until it subsides:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times brought on inflammation and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	whenever it happens, if you treat the patient to make him whole, then set him free, until the swelling subsides.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then warm the affected limb with hot water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as its own treatment comes to pass.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of the treatment for dislocation of the shoulder joint, since it is a painful injury.
des mandibules	of the jawbones.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated and outwardly, and the dislocations of both jaws occur in two manners:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	They are a little bone of their own, and soften a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely dislocated, and hang down to the elbow, and cut the saliva from his mouth so he cannot hold it, nor close his mouth, and with speech is overcome by his tongue.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it recurs more often in various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and finished, then you must reset it quickly, and do not wait.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in this manner that the ministers hold his head back, and pour a small quantity of the mixture from one of his hands into the root of the dislocated jawbone within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other hand be covered, for it should equal.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And instruct the patient to soften his jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And put the mirror on him equal, so he regains his place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	But if the jaw returns swollen, especially when both jaws are affected, apply warm water and oil until it softens lightly.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not force it to return to its normal state, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned to their normal state, and the mouth of the patient is swollen slightly while softening, apply moist cloths soaked in rose oil made from melted oil and beeswax, then bind it lightly with lint.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, with their heads between two pillows, so that he does not move either to the right or to the left, and do not force anything else, but rather give him gentle meat until the pains are gone, and the jaws are numb.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then take what he wants lightly, and do not work on opening his mouth to mend and drink, until the jawbone is well closed and sound.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset to their point in one hour, and are not converted back to their places, then fever and sickness are set in, and by chance, belly pain occurs, and by chance, vomiting of clear blood.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	and when you see this, then know that it's deception;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many have died from this in seven days.
de la forcelle	of the forearm.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forearm cannot move across the bone inside the joint and against the flesh, and it is dislocated every time without fail, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the limb against the palm of your hand, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the plaster and the bandage, and bind it;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the joint that is towards the shoulder cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	He will not recover, and if he is dislocated at all, so that it is reset to its proper place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then applies the plaster and bandage, and ties it, instructing the patient to rest until they are healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and so again is brought back the head of the spine, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	About the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Which know that the shoulder joint is dislocated in three kinds:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	because it dislocates at the lower end of the humerus below;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the joint of the elbow;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and sometimes dislocates above, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	And do not let it dislocate behind the shoulder, and do not let it dislocate within the chest area.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And dislocations often occur below the collarbone, especially in those who have little strength, because they are suddenly exhausted.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	But for those who have enough strength, the pain is intense and it goes to unbearable levels, and then they become unbearable.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some people that they are struck or crushed, and an abscess forms on the shoulder hot with inflammation, and they think they have a dislocation.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore, one should examine it carefully, until you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And this is known about dislocations when they occur below the collarbone, and you will find a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will discover differences in their diversity.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And you will find a hollow at the shoulder, and beneath the shoulder there is an asselle, also like the one we have seen;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot return his hand to its normal place, nor can he move it in any way.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also if she is dislocated above, and it's not hidden, because you will find it clearly at the shoulder.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this kind of dislocation is not very serious to treat when it's new, or if the patient is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the minister lifts the hand of the patient up high, then puts his fingers beneath the asselle, and lifts the joint to strength in the normal place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	And let the minister relieve the hand, and extend it upwards, because he puts it below;
si venra hastanment.	if it is to be cut.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said before in our hands each day, then it is fitting that the patient be bathed in hot water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and he gives him an arsenic and fenugreek and meliloton concoction in water, just as is given;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then let the patient be placed upon his back, and put an assel on his shoulder with a linen cloth that is not too soft nor too hard; then place your finger on the joint of the talon, and lift the head of the shoulder very gently, and treat the hand of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	And other servants take your head from the patient, so that it does not move again.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	That shoulder returns to its place now, and if you see it move according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and that there be a person standing in the room who is greater than the patient;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and standing on the opposite side of the patient's back, and tapping his shoulder below the incision, and lifting the incision upwards so that the patient hangs from the arm;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And another servant treats the patient's hand downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then they must put with them any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And again, one returns in another manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And let it be so that you pull the long bone into the earth, where the joint is also in its proper place, as if it were being pushed, and not too big or too small.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	and then it is placed below the patient, but if he has a soft covering above, and the patient lies on the long wooden staff;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	and then his hand is stretched out below the other side of the joint, and the joint returns to its place as soon as possible;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take a long bone of two forearms and four thick ones, which have their head right in front to enter into the hollow of the femur, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then tie up on top of the head with a cloth so that the flesh does not bleed, then put under the bone of the sick person;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and take one arm out over the length of the bone, and tie the assistant to the bone, and the arm on top of the shoulder, then put the arm over the pin of an eschele with a wide diameter, and stretch out both hands below, and let the body hang down from another part;
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the joint is put back now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is so, in any manner whatsoever, it is suitable that you put below the abscess a spear of wool equal, then place the plaster made from pumice powder on it with incense and onions of oil, over the entire shoulder and around, then strain from beneath the abscess immediately, and turn the bandage back onto the plaster, and encircle the hand around its neck, so that the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	and it is fitting that he should not move at all, until the limbs are comfortable, for he will heal faster;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then move more after five days or seven, and move him.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is firm and it cannot be softened, then it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is swollen from moisture or from some other reason, then it is advisable to apply cauterization at three punctures, as he is placed in front of or beside the cautery container.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do this and after seven days it becomes loose again and the joint will not hold, and he cannot lift either arm above, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder have been struck or stretched or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint is never put back in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that occurs near the elbow and knees or at the back, is done by impulse and stretching of hands, and it requires another joint.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure until he is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes pain in the member, and slow movement, then use the patient baths many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder cut
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the shoulder joint that becomes dislocated at a point, and again returns to its place.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And it has come loose from all parts, and itself at front and back, and the dislocation is not corrected, for one sees well and feels well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And it loosens according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased limb with the healthy one, so the wound can be seen clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is swollen, and cannot bend the arm, or reach one's shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is fitting that you also reset it so that the abscess comes to a head, because if the abscess comes to a head, then it will be painful to put it back.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And perhaps it cannot be reset entirely, especially when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	and if so, it's better than other dislocations, and is accompanied by greater pain, and perhaps death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And restoration is done, when it's such that you can put her back together again, then extend your two hands to hold her.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And let the arms be spread out, and the hands straighten according to the cost of the forearm, desor and desoz, and push the joint onto its place, or at the root of his palm, until it comes back to its proper position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if there is a dislocation, so that it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and very strong on the root of the palm where the finger is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not return to its proper place, apply strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and let the two men extend the arm, and straighten the elbow with both hands, so it does not move at the extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm on each side, after having wrapped a double cloth, long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the fingers grip the joint at his hand, if he cannot apply oil to soften the joint, then push the joint together until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when she is at rest, if you put on plaster with egg white, and stretch the strain, and bend the arm towards the shoulder of the patient, and leave it for some days, then release.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, release the ligament and leave it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint does not hold well, renew the plaster and ligament, and leave it for some days, until it is firmly fixed.
puis le deslie.	Then release.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels great pain after the return of the joint, and it is quiet, then bathe him and rub him well, and press until it be soothed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	To put on the joint a lamb's fat, then leave it there for a day and night, then take out the bone, and let the flesh enter the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when it heals, rub the joint temperately, then put back the lamb's fat, and let the flesh enter the bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do it twice or three times until he is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see, put on a poultice of fried fat with moist ashes and draw it off.
si revenra a sa disposition.	if it returns to its place.
li dislocation de la main	Dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The shoulder joint of the hand dislocates, and when it returns is lighter than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Everywhere, it is necessary to bring it back to the same place immediately, in its own house where it has been displaced, so that the joints are swollen, or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And if you bring it back so that you place the patient's hand on a table, and stretch out your hands, and you put your fingers equal, so that you place your palm on the appearance of the joint, press down until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Everywhere, it is necessary to look whether he is well afterwards;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then put the patient's left hand on a table with extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, so instructs the patient to put his back on his hand above the table, and he places his hand above this appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If this is not so, then the strain of apothecaries calms abscesses on the chariot and he lets it go so that it starts again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put him in his bed after some days, the joint will be twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and the patient should not be moved at all until his hands are fully numb and he cannot feel anything.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	so they know that the nerves have been struck or cut off;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other remedy but to strangle with the cautery in this case, and by chance it may be worth something.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hands are at rest, so put on the bandage that we have said, then tighten and let it be for four days, then take it off and leave it like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	But if it cannot be made to move and there is no pain, apply the poultice of hot water and rub it until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of a dislocation in both hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	never are the two fingers of the hand misplaced in any direction, never on the back of the palm or on the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	And so the doctor should bind the wound with cloth as long as it is fresh, and then support the head of the dog, and push it towards the place where it was dislocated;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leaves it there for two days, and then fixes it on that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and fastens it as we have said, and the dressing of the day, and moves it, and binds it to the joint;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it has become dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do it just as you have done before, until it becomes sound;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same if it has become dislocated in another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	From the wound of the dislocated shoulder of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder or neck is dislocated, and there are other dislocations, if there is no remedy, because the disease hastens the patient's death.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the limbs will fall off unless they are voluntarily held in place, or they cannot be retained, and many members are softened, or one of the two legs or both arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times the shin is broken in four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That which breaks at the back is called "gilbosiez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment is that you should repair if the gilbosiez has come from childhood;
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no cure or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from a fall or impact, or similar things, the ancient people used to treat with great words, but it brought no great benefit.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	There is no healing in the swelling that comes to the front of the leg;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also the one that comes directly to both sides, and no heat can cure it unless the proper one comes from behind, as I said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and that the patient is stretched out face up in the same way as his back, and has a strain under him, lest he will bleed;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then place a strip of cloth under the head on the ground, and another under the feet, and tie a rope behind the legs of the patient, and another around the joints, and knees.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two ministers see the ties, one to the head and the other to the joints, among the two fists;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and let them be well closed, the fist as we have said, and the nails put their palms on the spine, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this cure, take a board of three cubits long, and shave the skin over the wound, and let the patient lie on his side, and pour water from the head of the board over the wound, then put the middle of the board on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and put the nails on their joints above the other head of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, perform it on the turnip that turns in the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you place two thorns on the head of the patient with a large arm, and towards their feet, and between each thorn, a span of an inch.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and in each thorn there is a puncture, or the tendon runs through, and the thorns are firmly planted in the ground, so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two thorns there is a second thorn, in the place where the tendon turns, and there are two smaller thorns, an inch long, to turn the tendon.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the tendon that is between the flesh and the head's tendon to one thorn, and the other tendon to another thorn, each of the attendants turning their own tendon onto the tendon, and the masters placing a straight needle as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	When it is even, put on plaster desiccating with a lot of water, and then the poultices, and then the estele of a tablet of three dollars long, which is reddened by the left of the gilbosicity and the healthy part of the spina sainne, then tie it with a ligature, as we have said, and use the subtlety of nursing until he is sane.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if no remedy comes in the end of his health, it is fitting to administer medicines that soften and disperse, with the estele which we have said previously.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And at times when one administers a poultice and at times the appearance comes in the lower spina dorsa of the back, and we think that it is a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and this is the bone which opens, for we must not have any suspicion:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	on will come by chance death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the knee.
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the shoulder and the joints of the elbow only come to fires through dislocations alone, not like other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the elbow joint is displaced according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	within and without, and in front of and behind;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more within the joint, and less dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of dislocations within it is that when one joins the sick limb to the healthy one, if it is longer, and the patient's knees are opened more than those of the healthy person, and cannot double their knee flexion in the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the joints that are swollen with pus because of a foul abscess arises from it.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that which comes to the outside is that these accidents are against what is before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of one who has it in front of him are that he is standing well with his leg according to its completion.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	All the way down, do not make a big deal about his knees in pain, and if he is made to walk, it cannot be done before, and he retains his urine, and swells his groin, and when he urinates, it passes above the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that person who suffers from this (afterwards), are that they cannot spread their knees, nor double bend them, and the leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle has been softened, and there is the swelling of the groin at the level below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The remedies for this resemblance of dislocation are if you return the joint when there is an old dislocation, and it stays according to its disposition, if there is no cure.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And it is not wise that he should have suspicion.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in this one where the dislocation is fresh, and it's four kinds of dislocations, if you hurry to turn the joint, and put it inside and out, and move it with your right and left hand;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	if it comes back, and there is no other need for another treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	and if it does not come back in this way, then it is best that you apply a strong remedy, and fasten the leg strongly with two hands, or with one bandage above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and another strong remedy is to extend his hand in this way that he pours out his hands beneath his armpits, and then tightly ties a soft bandage around the chest;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another one binds the head with the bandage.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And stretch upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted up from the earth once, and stays.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in four forms, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it's quite true.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this does not happen, it is advisable to give treatment for their likeness.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the pardaens, it is advisable to lift the patient up on their healthy side, then put a bandage above the root of the elbow, and let it be in that position below the angle, and towards the flesh.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then put others to hold the patient's arms, and encircle the large arm of the sick person, and stretch it outwards from.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	And this way of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot do it in this way that we have said, then it is advisable to tie the two feet and one leg of the sick man together with a strong soft cord on both ankles and knees, so that the sick leg is extended twice as much as the other legs.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then let it be suspended on the head of a stick, and above the ground two arms long.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command the minister to wrap his arms around the belly of the sick man, and let other ministers hang beside him who wrap their arms around the patient, as now the joints are healing rapidly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when dislocation is absent, let the patient heal as we have said in the case of those with gout, and pull the bandage tightly over the sick leg itself, and on the flesh as well;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two thorns, one on the head and another on the other joint, then stick a thorn between the joints at the patient's foot.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and attach wet cloths around it so that the patient will not bleed, then extend each of these ministers towards him, and let the fingers meet equal to his hand at the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it doesn't return, put the leg on a surface, and press it as we have said in the chapter about gout, and cure the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And if a dislocation is in front of it, so as to extend the patient's leg quickly, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and let the fingers press against the patient's pain above the angle of the joint, then press with the other hand, and extend them to the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is to the outside, so as not to extend the patient downward, nor lift him up from the ground, but rather that he be in such a state as if his shoulder had been displaced outward, just like we said when lying on both shoulders.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And so it is on its face, and the ligament is stretched as we have said before, and must press upon the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	And so it will be when the patient extends their legs, and they are even.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	And then add the nails, and apply plaster, and tie with a bandage, so that the hunch does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and then rests for three days or four, and afterwards lifts the plaster.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, as before, and the bandage, then leave them for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and afterwards lift it, and let the thing go on well, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the shoulder joint dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The joints are dislocated three times according to:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	this means the joint is dislocated inward and outward, and at the back.
et ne desalue point devant.	and not to the front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg to his groin, and if he does not straighten up at his groin, know that the joint is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and place his foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take hold of his groin with your palms, and press between your two hands, then bend the two sides of his groin that form.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and some other servants stretch out their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he is well, his foot on his thigh in light ease;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and he puts on the plaster, and he makes his foot dry in the thigh, and the joint is brought together very tightly for three days or four, then he lifts it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and the sick do not have to be moved again until the limb is made comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	If the limbs are not at all, then treatment is extended greatly, as we have said in the cure of the gout, until they become whole again.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the foot dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The feet are sometimes swollen and sometimes completely inflamed, and within and without.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tightened before the part where it has been dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The remedy is lighter, and it must be stretched lightly with his hands only when he is in great pain.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated entirely, so it is fitting that you make the patient sit upright, and the tendon ministered to by the foot, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then take the stone to your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then stretch it up high, and pour it into the upper part thoroughly;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, pouring and taking the stone out;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, then it is good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	but if not, since it returns.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix a cord firmly in the earth between his thighs, binding them tightly, so that he does not bleed.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Afterwards, give you the minister of the flesh, and one other minister extends the foot to his hands or to its ligament, he ties it up above the neck of the foot.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each of these ministers extends it equally, and the straps are tied up between the flesh of the patient to hold the patient in place while stretching.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then puts the splints equal to the dislocation on his hands, and one other minister ties the sound leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it returns to its point, he puts on the plaster and bandages above, and the pressure forms, and ties the foot to the leg, and watches out for the nerves that are above the ankle, so that the ligaments are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then let him stay for two or three days, and if he holds fast, release it;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then take him out on the third day or on the fourth day, and set him free after four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he goes beyond that time, it is not surety that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms on the foot comes up, it is advisable to make him calm, as we have said elsewhere, until he is cured.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, they are advisable to be extended with work, and it's a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any part of the back of the bone or on the foot, it is best to sit him upright on that side either on a plain bench or on the table straight up, and place your foot over that which appears of those joints, then press with your foot firmly, until he revives;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when he is level and there is nothing opening, put under the sole of the foot a wooden board with two knees, then release him firmly, and let him stay for three days, then take him out;
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him rest, so he may recover.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound occurs with the dislocation, and one attempts to restore it, many patients die.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, but are not skilled in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not kind and merciful and delayed in your treatment, do not be harsh.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning of all things, use soothing remedies for abscesses and cuts, and let the patient be in the hand of God, if you do not see a chance of recovery.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and if you see a chance of recovery, then now reset the limb to its proper place, as soon as possible, in order that the abscesses may heal.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is at rest, administer soothing measures to incise an abscess, and treat the wound if necessary, with dried ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if with the dislocation there is a break and small bones shattered, you will set the bone, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and beware of entering a path of fear, for I have said so, because this is what is worthy of you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom that armors you and your body.
