O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh sons of great fame, I have completed this book which lies behind the science of medicine in assembly, and have finished it for its explanations and by my statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I would complete this book for you, which is part of the work from hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And for this reason that the work of hands is pressed in our region and is strange all around everywhere, it has been lost through science and decay, and nothing remains from the fires except small descriptions in books of the ancient ones who have moved their hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this arose the errors and vices, and are closed the intentions, and alienated the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I can revive life according to the order of this treatise following the way of exposure, declaration and abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will assemble the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments in the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who enters this that to study anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the measure of bones, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of the marrow, nerves, and bones, and the number of joints, and the movement and rest of veins, and with his new understanding.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And thus Hippocrates said that the art with the hand is most, and with the work is least;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and it is the same in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	Let us say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable of the things said here will, if he guards himself, avoid falling into error and will know those who are wise.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Once I have wanted to try many of these who refuse to learn this science, and abandon themselves without knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut the abscess of a scrofulous woman or her neck, and cut the arteries in the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood flowed out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of an old man, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	so he carried off a piece of the bladder with it, and died of the wound inside three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have seen it happen many times that they call for treatment, and see the condition of the patient and the size of the wound, and know well whether they will die from it.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another doctor who took in the treatment of a duke from our land who had broken his leg, and with the break caused an injury;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and let the skilled hands bind the wound with strong ties, and do not leave it until it heals.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and command that he does not release it (from its position).
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and thus left the leg completely exposed, and the feet came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was summoned to come to him, and I hastened to come to release the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I saw that it was dislocated, he was in a peaceful state and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the corruption had been confirmed in that member, and it could not be cured;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there was another cure that destroyed the abscess, enchanted it, and then inflamed through the evil of its power.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a boil, when it is purified of melancholic humor, does not suit that one touches it with iron unless there is some way to remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And because of this, dear son, you must know that work done by hands is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	which means, having or carrying the risk of occurring in various conditions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each one of these books where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	So that you may guard yourselves, so that no one who knows will be able to speak evil of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your arms in consideration, and undertake your sick people gently but firmly, and use the best way, so that by God's grace you will be saved and praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave the dreadful diseases to cause sickness.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And put your armor on this that makes you doubt, for sometimes it is in your hands so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	The Greeks are mentioned in some of his writings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not treat yourself with medicine for a bad illness, lest you be called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this book according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are on fire cauterization and cold medicine cauterization, and the chapters are ordered from head to toe.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and the forms of excretions, and instruments for cauterization, and all that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapters are on cutting and piercing, and on ventouses and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and so are the chapters arranged and the forms of the humors.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and is ordered like the chief joints just as pieces, and forms of humors.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Also, as we remember the work, it is fitting to tell which quality of aid and which kind of nuisance each condition has.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of aid and of harm is the longest speech and subtle science and the secret responses;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and this is what the more learned ones spoke about, and agreed upon;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and they soften a little on their words, because I am weary of length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cauterization helps universally in every complexion where there is matter, whatever the complexion may be:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	It is to know the nature of hot complexion with matter, and dry complexion with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry complexion combined with matter, some have discussed and said that cautery is great aid.
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And the others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	That cautery is worth nothing for disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated with cold medicine for heat or dryness.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And this one who says the opposite, that cautery is great help to diseases hot and dry that come into the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you buy the body of a man and its moisture is in accordance with the hot complexions, you find that the body freezes.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it one time through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And all ways, do not enter fire unless the one who has proven it, and knows by long usage the cautery chapter, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and remedies and space of time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	We have no fear of other types of complexion, especially of cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that cautery is made from fire, and contains more healing power than cauterizing with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	The fire is simple, and does not come from fire to other limbs except those which are burned.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The hot medicines come from member to member by removal, and bring about the illness of the diseased in the place of healing.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And perhaps it will cure the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire does not act for its height and for the goodness of its substance, unless it has a surplus or excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found through experiment and by the length of my service and study, and it is well known among things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is revealed by fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher said in demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Instruct the patient to think about this.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, when it will be decided to perform the cauteries, and when you should pray.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is beneficial in all times, because the remaining nuisances are removed by the aid of cautery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And even more so, when the cuts are for painful purposes and necessary wounds that cannot be endured until greater misfortune comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not think ever, dear son, how they made those fools.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	because the disease that is cured by cautery has no return.
et il le dient ensi;	and he says this;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not so as they claim, because cautery is not just a medicine that changes the complexion and dries out the humors that cause pain; rather it is a medicine of great value and virtue, done quickly by its power and operation.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And certainly, it is possible for the disease to come upon someone at any time according to their bodily constitution and the temperament of the illness and its virtues.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and the superfluities are assembled in him with the acquisition of food and similar things; but if you do not administer cauterization to him when he has little superfluity and moisture, as is done for cauterizing dens because of pain, and similar things, and the same pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	and many people do not understand why cauterization is called the "backside of medicine", and it's seeing.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they don't believe that cauterization is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it's cauterization being the "backside of medicine" because whenever we administer different kinds of cures for no malady, and they are useless, then we administer the cautery, and it is valuable.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then open well that cauterization is for those with fever, not according to the foolish opinions of madmen.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancient people said that cauterization with an instrument of gold is more effective than iron, and they say that fires only for the quality of the gold and because of the height of its substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the cutting of cauterization does not cause putrefaction, but it is not true for me because I have tried it, and found that it's true in some people;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And cauterization with gold is more valuable than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And whenever you heat an instrument of gold, you don't know when it will be cooled by the color of the gold.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if it is heated too much;
si font au feu;	so they are made in the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And thus there is much hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we will use fire cautery that we have used before on our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter on the head to be followed with great care, because the vein is more delicate to find.
dou cautere olivaire	when olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is applied to moist and cold surfaces on the head, and there's one we do by the cause of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend onto the head and ears, and into the eyes, and for many pains and discomfort from teeth, ears, and throat, as well as all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patients should be purged by medicine, dissolving the humors in the head three or four, according to what the virtues and properties and the custom of the patient can bear;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then tie up the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands in a certain position.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	After placing the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and when it comes to your two thumbs, if it bleeds from the wound then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", because this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And put on the patient's hand a signet ring of ink, and do it by lowering and pulling apart your hand little by little while twisting.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then lift the patient's arm without any resistance, and check if you see the bone a little.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you do not see the bone, then repeat the cautery as I told you until you see the bone like I told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After applying a small amount of silk, and putting on woolen cloth inside, put it on the patient, and let them remain for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After put on cotton moist in butter;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and let it remain until the swelling is drained.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After a treatment of the wound on the elbow called "tetrafarmacón", so that it is cured.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And if the old ones say that when the wound remains longer, it purges more.
et por ce si aide mues.	and therefore aid is added.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And any of those said that one must cauterize the wound so much that part of the bone is burnt, and then resettle what has been burned by the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And the others say that one must cauterize as long as they can pull off, and pound so hard as you lower on the bone just as wide as the spindle that women use in their sewing, for this reason that the humors come out moved out.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must pull off the wound longer.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	afterwards it must be cured and applied to.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem good to everyone, fire or no fire.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and I think that he should let him lie;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the joints are weakened by continued solutions of nature, just as we have observed in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and also when the joints of the sick person are weak by nature, and the first treatment of cautery is more salubrious and more soothing for me, and from that comes this same remedy;
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of ancient pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When in all cases the head comes with chronic pain that lasts a long time, he must use the patient's herbs and pills called "couchie", and purge of the head, ointments, and emplasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one makes the cautery that we have previously mentioned, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Prepare yourself if the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and it is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Therefore perform cauterization on the same place as we have already said about.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After performing cauterization on each corner of the head just where the bone is, as we have said before, and perform cauterization to the one that is called "vessel".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and it is often done in which place they put ventilators;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and tie your hand so that you do not hear anything just where the bone is;
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patients feel too much more severe pain in this cauterization than in the others, and I will speak about it later;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is fitting that cauterizing of horns are more subtle than those who cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain and the disease spreads up to the oil, and the joints are purged with medicinal powders, and other treatments that I have said in dividing the diseases, do not benefit.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	and so it is necessary to perform cauterization in two manners, that is to say, according to the method of cold medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cauterization of cold medicine is that you take a dose of alum, and remove the scab and scrape it up with two fingers, and then make an incision at the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can replace the dose of alum under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when she is reset, if the ligaments are tied tightly and left so for 12 hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then the dressing is made with hot wood ash and vinegar, and leaves the wound for 2 days or 3.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then puts a cotton plug in butter until it stops the discharge.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment of ointment, until he is safe.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see, do as I have written or prescribed for any medicinal substances that burn.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heating the cautery of this kind is thus the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closet" because the head is shaped like a hole or has a little bit of bird (feathers), and in the middle, there is a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	And put it on its proper place of pain, and hold your hand and turn the fever a little lighter, until the moisture of the passion that kills is burned.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	Hold your hand so that the arteries do not burn, which is in front, and there is an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Put cotton on it to dress a wound, and put it back on its proper place for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put moist cotton with butter on it, and then treat the wound of ointment until it is healed.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at its entire tip, and keep the artery covered in this migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of a headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migraine in the manner we have stated in our divisions of diseases, and do not benefit from it, and see that the fire cautery was previously mentioned by physicians regarding medicine and iron did not suffer, then it is necessary to cool the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And thus, on the left, strike a line of half an inch deep with steel, and hold your hand tight once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and will not be born to the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And guard the jawbone so that it is mute when one chews, and the nerves have no sensation but pain and spasm will come to the patient, and guard the corruption of the artery when it is cut, or if cutting has great fear and also harm to oneself, who is not a student or an expert;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the wound heal in its proper place;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to bind blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it occurs.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	But if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient suffers much, cauterize them also on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has two cuts;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of ear pain from cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When ear pain comes from cold, and you have tried medicines that dissolve and other treatments that we have said in the section on division, and the pains do not subside, then apply this cautery which is called "pins", because it is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After pricking all around the diseased ear, or near both if pain remains in both, and you move a little towards the root of the ear after marking it with ink;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	And have 10 points for each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment, let him be sane.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth's torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Tortures that must be cured by cauterization, except those caused by swelling, as we have said in the divisions of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not perform cauterization on those that come from swelling and pus of the skin.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this swelling of a torture that swells from inflammation and purging of the head and gargarete, and since these are not considered, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one in the root of the ear, and another near the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery in the healthy part that is opened up, and let them apply cautery directly to the forehead above a little below the eyebrow, and another one on the temple as long as an inch.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and let it burn so that the moles on his face are burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is like the form of a knife that we have shown before, but it is slightly more subtle and must be that the knives be slightly thicker;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing as I have said, until he is whole.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it as we have said, and he does not recover, and the patient has no fever, then let him do four cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	In the second part of the head, and in the first ear, and on the one that is called "wazel" as we have said before, apply cautery to the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	of lassitude.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	To this illness, it is fitting to give the patient large and pill-like medicines for the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After applying the head of the patient to all of them, and putting on the ointment of fennel in the back of the neck, which is written in treating ointments;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the manner of cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is thus healthy, then good is;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if he is not so, then do three cauteries on the head near the neck, and space one thumb's breadth between each cautery two of great size.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	And the treatment as the others; and if you see a lump, then do one cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it's wise, two others above the two horns, and the treatment until he is healthy.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	And let it be the cauteries which are called "olivary", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is fitting that the head be purified with years and what we have previously said;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After the illness the head of the patient, then cauterize in the middle of the head and on each horn, and on the third from behind and above the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	And if you wish to do more, and the body is moist, and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease is severe, then cauterize four times on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let it be left until the greatest wound is cooled, and lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the cure until he is healed, and apply what is called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	From the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use fire cautery on those who are flaky, and it is fitting to first soften the brain with years and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffers from many of the medicines.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, then make gargarism and mastication of a poultice that moistens the brain often with raw meat.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king's head is removed, and he undergoes the fire cautery according to what we have said before, and undergoes the cautery on his neck, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is very strong and suffers, he undergoes fire cautery in the same way as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of his back and throat, and should be cauterized olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is sick, if he does fire cautery subtle according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When because of melancholy there are superfluities or corrupted moistures and a great flux, then the fire cautery on tender parts as we have said to him who had paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the superfluities decline due to melancholy and the body of the sick person is moist, then let him drink something so that the intellects be clarified, according as it is beforehand in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the king's head is given to the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	After make a cloth of linen well made, like a circle, put it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and let them be tied in such a way that they are well crossed, and held in all parts;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After presenting the thread, take up a bandage of wool grease.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and let it be heated by fire temperately, so that the wounds may bear it.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after draining the circle from within the head, let it cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this for the patient each week once with good governance, until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see someone being cautered while making many pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery is more suitable for the brain;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put on a wet cotton cloth in lard and fatty meat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye comes first in this way by the signs I have said in division, then begin and do give the patient something that cleanses the head, and guards against all moistures, and make it sweat or take a bath several times daily.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After he is commanded to put his head back, and he does cautery from the inside of the head, and does two cauteries on each temple if there is a falling out with both eyes together, or if one is affected alone.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And take care of all the cautery on every vein and artery that is under the cheek, and be careful to cut them long according to the size of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And be careful of the decomposition of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stain it with a little strength just like how you did.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incising, how to carefully do it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And never perform a cautery or haterel (likely "hatterel", an old word for "copper knife") under the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	Of men of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the eyelids are old and accustomed and are over the veins, or under the arteries that appear on the surface of the cheek.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and then we see that it is the swelling of cold phlegm, therefore, let the fire cautery be done which I have said at the beginning, descending to the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	Cut cautery on the head, and cut on both sides of the two temples, and cut under the two bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if it is a more serious condition, then the cautery should be done in the same way above the eyebrow to all the little cuts.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Out of the flesh through the eyelids
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you give medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then let the patient drink three poisonous substances;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king has been done for the head, and let there be a cut in the middle of the fire olive cautery;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And do the second fire cautery on the two wounds called "clavilis" under the two shoulders, a little below.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and watch out for the artery that you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then apply the cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	Because of this there is
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see, do the second fire cautery on the two wounds as long as the wounds are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave off the hand, except until the third part of the paper is burned, as I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	One hair which touches the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	There is never a case where the hairs of the ointment are converted into pardaens, and they prick, and then one does fire cautery according to two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	which is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	and when they are long and even, then put the patient in a safe place;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	and then mark the paper around the eyes with a figure such as that of the flame of myrrh, and just like the beginning of the sign of the hair.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then put cotton soaked in beeswax and musk of pyrethrum on the oil, and then apply the cauterization with this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked, slowly apply heat a little at a time, so that the color is fixed in the right place.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and when the signs of health of the eye are that you see the parchment withdrawn, and the hairs raised at the tip of the nail;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and therefore lift your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then apply cotton moistened in butter until the swelling is drawn.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treatment of ointment until he is cured.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this the hairs come back and the parchment is softened, then resume the cautery on that very same place, just as you did first;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are fallen out, then cuterize until the parchment is raised to its natural place, and even, and does not prick at the hair anymore.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The fire cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment shape of the form of myrtle leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take some French soap and live charcoal, one of each, Z., and grind them together well.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and make it hastily, if it does not cool down, then place it on the form as you have made like a myrtle leaf, and put paper over the eyes;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the illness is held in only one kind of oil, so it must be applied to both.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put the oil-soaked cotton cloth in an earthen vessel;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And the head of the patient should be in a healthy state, and show its pain above the medicine, and press it firmly on the muscle every time the patient feels sharp pains from the medicine, for he feels sharp pains just as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine has come to your death.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the sharp pains have passed, if you lift the limb, and make sure it is warmed up as if it had been warmed up by constraint of fire or incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and so he will be well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not so, then put back the medicine on the limb or if it has not worked yet, until your work is equal and your eyes are at their right place.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on cotton soaked in fat until the wounds have closed, after curing the limb with a dressing called "diaphenis" and others, until it is completely healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if necessity requires that you guard yourself well on your work by great care, so that the wound does not occur again.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes wet after that, and they prick at the hair in the oil, then resume the medicine on that person who has been softened by the paper properly, as you have done before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the cure until he is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the mercury mixture:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And so one must know that the eyes of men are different in size and proportion, and according to this one's complaints;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and do not be replied that the correct way is for him who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cauterization treatment of a fistula.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit him, then it is necessary to cauterize him according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head on a clean cloth;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and let the barber tie his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	After the application of a moist cloth or persil juice on oil.
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After applying heat to the cauterization which is divided:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is shaped like a bird's beak as it resembles the cauterization;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if it is pointed from the top to the bottom, and if it is so as a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but all of this is worthless for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the abscess until it bursts and pulls out its pus, and dries;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, then the operation is performed, and fire is applied to the bowels;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	After the fire cautery is applied to the skin, hold the cautery hot on the area that needs healing, and keep your hand over the cautery at the place of the wound, so as not to cause madness.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and put the cautery in the grease of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of cauterization just after the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If this does not work, repeat the cautery once more, and if it is necessary again, leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After that, put a wet cloth in butter on the wound, and apply a drying ointment until it is healed, and after forty days if it has not been healed, put on medicine to dissolve the bone.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and he will do according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterization for an abscess that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Let an ulcer, and cut off the finger;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After putting in the incision of a small hook so that it is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and make to the quantity of one and half fingers' breadth;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	And hold your hand firmly on the hook so that it does not move at all, until the poultice is fused and does not run to its own blood;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is fitting that one puts on the poultice moistened with water or oil on the patient's skin in linen.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the poultice if made on the finger of an ulcer, and makes the patient sound in marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not the case, it is necessary to administer pus into the wound and return the fistula to its proper place in the body as is suitable for each individual.
des crevaices en levres	of fissures in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often fissures occur in the lips that are called "poils", and likewise in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these crevices of what we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then apply a small cautery surgical according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And then puts it immediately into those crevices until it comes out at the same place;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cure the shoulder joint is stable again.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess on the throat.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes to the root of the neck or in the cheek or at the roots of the teeth, after being putrid and rotten and dried up and becomes a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you cure it as we have said in previous divisions, and it does not benefit at all.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	therefore it is necessary to cauterize according to the size of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the dressing or removal of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes alive at its tip, and draw the pus out.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do so once or twice, after the treatment as we have said for cures, until it is stable again.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	And if he is thus treated, this is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	And if this is not so, then it is necessary to discover the limb and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in that chapter.
dou movement des dens	A dislocation occurs of any joint from its place
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure him with medicines, but this is useless, then place the healthy head of the patient on your own.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after applying cauterization, from the shape of which will come later in this way, that you place a chain on the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put within the cauterization hot starch, and hold it with your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After your hand is lifted, resume the cautery according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After filling the patient's mouth with a foul-smelling concoction, let it sit for an hour and burn hot fires.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in some way, the teeth which were moving are fixed, and the gums are restrained, and the moistures corrupted are dried.
de la dolor des dens	Of pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When pain of the teeth comes from coldness, or if there is coldness in the ear, and medicines do not help, then it must be necessary to cautery according to two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cautery with butter if is done thus that you press butter from a vinegar-soaked cloth, and the end into a metal spoon or iron rod.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	After picking cotton and covering it with a cloth of gauze, let the paste of butter boil, and put on the painful tooth hastily and hold until it cools down;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The instrument for cauterization is made of iron or charcoal and must be large enough so that the flames do not reach the mouth of the patient;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After cooling the cauterization instrument, because then it will take shape again, and you place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the instrument is cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, because the pain will be felt on the same day or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of the cauterization, and then he rushes to cure him.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make cauterize where you wish, and according to what power you have;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	And thus is the form of the bone:
des scrophules	Des scrophules
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are swollen with fever and cold moistors, and do not yield to digestion by medicines, then heat the cauterizing knife of such skin after which comes the form, and cut open two openings for the fumes to come out from the other side;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and place the cauterizing knife on the abscess once or twice, as long as it is not drained from the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, apply cauterizing according to its size, and let it be so for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and put on a moist cotton wool in butter until the wound is healed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After a cure, let the limb rest for a while until it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cauldron
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture prevails over the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold temperament, then it is suitable for patients to be emptied first by medicinal solutions.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After applying fire cautery to the root of the throat, and keep in mind that you should not come near the throat again, but only let a small amount of heat.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After applying the second fire cautery to the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and consider the cauterized part which is called "clavicle" because we have the shape in front.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the limb as we have said, until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the throat.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and malady of winter are from cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and is a long-standing illness, then apply two cauteries on the pulse in their veins;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery on the flesh between the two nipples;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and so it is called "clavicle" according to the shape that is described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, apply cautery by pricking in the point where the cautery is called "points" because of its shape in the illness of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and are one thirty-third, or two thirds.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment according to what has been said, and if the cautery is applied at three points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because that way the cautery is lighter, because you do three of them at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder joint.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	After apply to the patient on their back and on their side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	After the head of the shoulder, instruct the patient to lift the curvature which is inside the joint with your left hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated within, so inflame the cautery which has two nerves in it, this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the curvature so that it perforates just on its side, and comes together with the four cauterized nerves;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, because the figures of the cauterization are these four.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and they are nerves according to the subtlety of an awning and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes, you press against this nerve because it is with eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After set on the cautery for pearl-like bruises with thread;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After resting the patient, do not keep the limbs still for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if they dislocate again, little things happen then; afterwards, make cauterization on the thick cauterizing knife, or many cauterizations in a point.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed up, and the moisture is removed and the patients are made healthy.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When there is frost in the stomach and much moisture so that they extract it to its condition, and many cathartics are multiplied upon him, and all the usual treatments do not benefit him, then it is necessary that the patient be put on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	For this, after the third cautery I is done beneath the skin of the leg for the amount of two drachmas, all over the cautery clavicle, and the second cautery is done outside on both sides so that there are three angles in total, and each space between one and the other is such that they will not be joined together when they rot.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and the cauteries are performed to the point that they inflame both parts of the vein, and the figure of the cauteries is according to this form near the junction:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see a great cautery in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	And he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and mark on the stomach at that point according to the quantity you see of the wound;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and then cauterize all the cautery which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the treatment we have had before, until it is cured.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver comes with pain from heat and moisture and great swelling, so that it is much removed from its natural condition because of excess.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patients are cured of what we have said in divisions, and they do not benefit from it, unless it is brought to be applied on its own heat.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and a mark of the third cauterization according to this form and figure and this quantity on the liver, except for the hypochonders, where the cost is of the belly comes.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	And hold a space of about an inch between each cautery mark on the size of a dog.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	And let the cauteries be long on the body, and do not press too hard with your hand all over.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	And let it be burned only on the moist parts of the wound, and let the patient lie straight on their limbs.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	And if he cannot, so let him lie on his side, and stretch out his legs, and lift up his limbs.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if your will is, to cauterize these cauteries on the tibia, so that you are subtle and wise in this art, and beware lest you burn all of the wound, for you would be drying out the entire body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and he shall not suffer from fever because the heat is very subtle to that place, and his senses are able to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When he has an abscess on the liver, and you see if it is in the flesh of the liver or on the membrane.
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the flesh, he feels a great pain but not extremely strong;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is on the membrane, he feels extreme pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment needs to be applied to the patient's head, it is convenient that he should lie on his side.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then mark the location where the abscess is, and then apply the cautery that resembles the form.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And burn the cautery so long as the wounds are red, and it comes forth just like pus, until the infection is completely gone;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the healing according to the remedy for the wounds so that it is safe.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And it is not to be used of this cautery on anyone who has not thoroughly studied the art of medicine, for by which hands these diseases have been cured no one.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	And so it can be done with great courage, and I think it's more valuable to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	How to treat peritonitis
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The old men said that we should make purgative cauteries with the roots of Aristogeon, and in this way:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a root of Aristogeon as long as you can find one, dry it, and make it just as big and just as long as your thumbs.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and pour the fat in oil, and press it to fire, and cauterize between the warts and the neck, and make cuts one by one while descending towards the area below the chin;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and cut between the fifth rib and the sixth, in a downward slant after a little.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and cut on the foot, and one above the stomach, between the two shoulders, and between the two ribs, where the cut is between the two shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press with your hand, but make an incision so tightly as in an odorant.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And old men said that no one uses the fire cauterization similar to shaving, and the flint and put it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and he will burn with fire, as we have said in the word of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patients die now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the abscess.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the abscess as we have said about the divisions of the treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they mention three kinds of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	From which one is a certain way so that you make three cauteries, or four, binding according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cautery that we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press with your hand at all the cautery, and let the sick man lie on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another way of cautery is that you draw the cautery with two nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the wound which is towards the mouse, or if the cuts of the sick person come to the left side, and so that the elevations you lift according to the wound, according to the length of the body, and the cautery are as wide as the breadth of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After the two fingers are burned, they should be flamed until the pain is perceived from the other side, and then take fire to apply cauterization, and thus it will have four effects.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see that all the cauterization is with three fingers.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has been exposed to rot for long times, and this applies to those who have already received other treatments said before.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy (or edema).
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not effective for dropsy, except when applied in the manner known as "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	As you cure according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and if your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary to make four cauterizations between the nostrils, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one below the mice, and two behind on the spine on the spine, and one on the opposite side of the foot.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and if the cauterizations are well near the spot of the wound.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leave the cauterization to be open for a long time, and do not leave the patient's cure after the cauterization.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing would hasten, and there will be two intentions with God's aid.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cautery for the belly is the claw which we have shown previously;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and that for the back is olive oil, as has been shown previously.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of joints.
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical and filled with dewy citron juice, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricle and the ankle;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and lift your hand with the cautery towards turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply in this method, lest they suffer like the one who was burned by fire, and so should you use cauterization according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After, make two cauterizations in each knee, one in the toe of the cutlass-shaped knife.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let them cut open to the long one, on both sides of the knee.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leaves the cuts open for a long time to be treated, until they heal.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after treating other treatments that we have said.
de la menoison	of the house.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a belly disorder comes from cold and moisture, so that the retained virtues and digestion that is in the stomach and intestines are deficient, and cannot be cured by other treatments.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering much and having great weakness, so do a cautery on the stomach according to what he said before, or stomach cautery, in circular motion.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and four fire cauteries are to be applied near the subtle nerves, and two fire cauteries are to be applied on the veins.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, make fire cautery on the nail, and do fire cautery on each joint, and two cauteries on the stomach with the great one, because the cure is beneficial when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	About the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the ulcers are on the fundament, or one or more of them, and they are old and are swollen with gross humors that are cold, moist, and corrupted, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not profit, then apply fire cautery:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	Three times on the spine of the back, those who are behind the almeccade, a little by a little in a triangle shape, and two fire cauteries below the nerves.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that the stomach is cold and the flesh does not cook, and the face swells up, then apply one fire cautery on the stomach, as it has been said, and one more above the liver, and one more above the spleen with all the cauterization clavile.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the fire cautery be left on for long periods.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After a cure, the limb must be made sound again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "theleul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you apply the cautery to the ulcer, if it seems as if the fire is making the sawing motion of a razor, and then put it completely ablaze on the ulcer that has been cut.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and leave it so long that the fire comes to the root of the vein, because there is no cutting.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do it once more and if there is much of the ulcer, cauterize each part as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the application of ointments, which are beneficial until they become healthy.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you apply a great fire to the swollen part, it will have more relief.
de plaie mal curee	of badly treated wounds.
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear either a dressing or an opening, that is what we will tell in his case, if it comes to such a sickness that can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no fistula, and it has grown old and swollen with putrefaction and moist corruption, if you wish to prove the depth of the wound, and guard so as to know how far it goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After the cauterization that resembles a razor, and pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that has entered, repeatedly perform the cautery until the corpse is burned and corrupted once, twice, or three times, depending on how much it needs.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And be careful of the ardent nerve that is inflamed, and great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula is in the abdominal cavity and intestine, be careful with those things, and do not apply fire to them unless in the gallbladder, and think that they are not human.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After treating the animal so that it is made whole again, and if the intestines are swollen, and the materials are long time stored, then you know that the intestines are made whole.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the materials are not bones, then know that the limb is rotten, and corrupting the bone to the point.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus as if we were speaking on its behalf.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When a pain of frost comes from the rain, and a great swelling, and it does not take hold in the woman, then it is fitting that you make fire cautery above both sides of the affected area and with the barbed needle which we have previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cautery in the middle, then there will be three fire cauteries in line, and these will bring greater relief.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is weak and damp from frost and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then you must cauterize in the area behind the bladder, where the hairs grow at the navel, on both sides, and one on each side, so that both are cauterized as long as one point.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	And let the fire cautery be performed on the back, where it is necessary.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the fire cautery be performed on the clavicle according to the shape described.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, they cause great pain.
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	so it is necessary to perform the fire cautery inside the womb, as we have said about fire cautery of the bladder, and also on the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let it be performed on the clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the joint
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the mucous viscera descend into the joint of the haunch, and because of this they move out of their place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the others when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found in the joints from departure by moving around, so it is fitting that you cauterize the patient under the skin of the hawthorn branch as if to draw a circle, and hold before the joint as if it were turning, so that the skin is inside the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if it is so cauterized as those which have been cauterized of the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if these cauterizations are not present, then do three cauterizations of the olivary branch, and make them as thick as all the keys.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal him until he is made whole.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the groin
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the skin of the hawthorn branch, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the illness is ancient.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then it is necessary to purge the patient of the heavy humors of old, foul pills, or other hard pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After applying the fire cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and it is done according to two manners:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	which means assemble medicines with herbs, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which some are like this:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	Where you cauterize on the bark of the juniper tree, three cauteries in the triangular form, and make it deep and large, and space each cauterization as wide as a doves egg, and are olive oil cauteries;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Never is cautery performed in the middle of the cheekbone, because there are four kinds according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, if the cautery at the point of a circle that we have said in the dislocation of the cheekbone;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but do it in such a manner that the circle contains all of the cheekbone, and all the bone in the area where it was burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which one does it when applying the sciathe (a form of treatment), as the pain stays in the hamstring and cannot reach either the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes close to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries above where the patient says that the pain is, and four doves, on the right side a little.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and whether it's the cutlass cautery or burn the thicker bone.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain is spreading to both of two feet or near it, then you should apply the cautery at the place where he feels the pain three times or four times which is called "point".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it happens that they do more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if he feels that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then you should apply the cautery at the cutellaire or circular cautery; and well guard in all your cauteries so that you do not burn the nerves and great arteries too much, and do not cause the patient greater nuisance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen others who did fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they burned so much that the leg was completely swollen, and the toes as well, and it became consumed and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach solution in which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in both legs together, do fire cautery in one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men said in the cautery of the hawthorn because this is the way, make an I such iron and it should be as big as a sailor's finger or slightly less, and so between each other with the space of an arrowhead to the quantity of a piece of thread.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and they shall be joined together again of two parts, and shall also be like now, and there shall be one bolt of iron well-made;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And so it should be heated until it is completely red and smells like vinegar, and then put upon the bone of the sick patient, and turned onto the healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and after the cautery is done once again they shall leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then cover with butter and let the wound be covered for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the bandaging treatment until it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasis says that we should use it little because of the fear of its sting, and since few people have used it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and it is clear that this is a good cautery, which he can bear, and where he is treated.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cautery of medicine is hot so that you make an instrument between the channels in which it falls on the margin of the door, and it is either of iron or of steel with a long appearance, and at its top there are two of each size and quantity, corresponding to the thickness of a dole.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and are put over and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After putting the blade of the hazelwood on the patient lying on his side, and pressing your hand very strongly onto the blade of the hazelwood.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing between the two circles of hot ash which are heated by one pot, and letting him suffer for one hour in bed, and feeling the heat and the burning of him.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	It occurs from biting as well as from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the bite has passed, lift up your hand with the instrument and gently lift the heel of the foot, and let it be for three days, and put on butter until the blackness of the bruise is healed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it be for three days so that putrefaction will cease;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this would be the rear part healed after the treatment of ointments until it is fully recovered.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended up to the thigh or down to the leg, make an instrument that tightens more than you did in the heel.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the method of applying hot ointment, and I have written it to treat the art of medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alum and vinegar alive, equal quantities of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	If there is a small opening made beforehand so that the point of an arrow can enter.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	And put a second pot with another kind of lead or silver on it, and add vinegar and gall and apply the powder to it so that when you have two layers of them over the wound, you will be able to grip it firmly in your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And let it remain in that state until the fever and pus descend from the opening of the lead or silver pot, then take out all of it, and apply gall and vinegar to it as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And if the fever is severe and has been brought under control through application of various medicines and cauterizations on other parts of the body.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it does all sorts of work like fire, and there are other medicines that must be cauterized well, such as this mixture of treacle, honey from the acacia tree, gall with soap.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And the Galen tells us of a cure in which one man was cured of the pain of the vein and sciatic pain, and great praise for it, and he says that there was no other cure needed, and he became whole once after this cure, and he bathed himself as he teaches it here afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And instruct the patient to press with a firm and fresh green leaf, and grind it much with a little fat, and put on the haunch and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is felt, and bind.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and let him leave three hours and by the quantity that the patient feels no more of the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then put it into a bath until the body is slightly swollen, and put it into the bed, and the pain will go away entirely and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And knows that no one should use cauterization with such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the varicose vein is cauterized with horsehair, it will greatly aid.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and must be done in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take a linen cloth and anoint it with old oil, and place it on the fossa which is between the big toe and the small toe.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dried horsehair and wrapping it in fire until it is charcoal-like, and then put it on linen, and let it be so stained;
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and redo again, and do not stop doing so until you think with sense that it comes to the heat, and that the pain is ceased;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this method of cautery is called "cautery on the knee".
de la dolor dou dos	of the great pain in the back.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or by percussion, or by great evacuation, or because it seems like material is spread out cold, none of these symptoms are worth cauterizing, except for those who come from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	it is necessary after this that the patient is void of fetid pills or other similar things; and on his loin, in that place where the pain lies, three lines signed with cautery, and in each line one or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and let it be done the cautery as is called "points".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, do three cauteries or four on the cauterized joint in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This is often the case with this illness in small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a stiff neck when they lift it up, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find in the lower back spine and on your back the appearance that comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see them being cured, if you cut him with the cautery of a cell according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cautery affects each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that when the fire cautery cuts into the spine at two or three points and the wounds are close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the patient so that he is healthy again as we have said, and take care not to apply fire cautery in gangrene which has inflammation of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of pain from the joints.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pain in joints is caused by moist spots that have spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes to the foot, they call it "podagre" properly, and since it's caused by cold reason and medicines cannot cure it, if cured by cautery in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	cut the oil of cauterization into the joint of the foot, and make the cauterization according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if he has need to prick at the flesh of the foot, then let him perform fire cautery on all the cautery as we claim "a point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come to both knees and other joints, and this has happened many times, then for each knee three cauteries or four of each part, all of these olive cauteries.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you have more business to attend to, so do it more, but do not keep your hand wet until the spices are dried.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend just to the knees and back, let him administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, so make points on each side of the wrist two lines.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there is no pain in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come to either elbows or shoulders, cautery each part, and give good governance to the patient and administer medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	If you do good governance and purge the phlegm, so will you be cured by God.
de la routure dou syfac	From the work of the cauterization
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a fracture comes with blood, and the bowels descend into the joints and it is newly so, then you must not treat it on the same day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things which make the belly swell, so that the fumes come down from his belly.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	After you make him sit on his back between your hands, and he orders you to tighten his leg so that the bowels are repaired, and take hold of it, and sign with ink on both sides of the fracture on the bone at the joint, in such a way that it is similar to half of a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then takes out the cauterizing instrument for this purpose:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as they are white and senselessness.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then takes out the bowels to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	And the attendants keep their hand above you so they do not return to your back;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	And work well on the thighs of the patient, and put a cloth over his crotch and another over his groin to keep his hands from being bruised;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then put the cautery on the mark at all your fingers, and hold tight with one hand and steady with another until you strike the bone, and if you do not strike it the first time, then repeat it again as many times as necessary until you reach the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and beware subtly lest the boiling blood escapes while you are doing the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	lest you burn it.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that the patients may not die from this or another illness.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	It is necessary to treat children with subtlety according to their measure; and great people as well in proportion to their size.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days of treatment with butter cautery, until the scab is fallen.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After the treatment of other ointments until he is cured, and applying the patient for 40 days on his back so that the wound is well dressed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that his nourishments be prolonged for a long time, so that the boils do not burst when he gets up to walk in the chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 40 days, when he wishes to rise, apply a well-made bandage and wear it for another 40 days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let him have good rest, he must work little and be careful not to drink too much wine and meat, and eat too high.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he follows this instruction so is entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after your operation on cutting with a cautery.
de la routure dou ventre	of the operation on the stomach
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When gashes come in other parts and are discovered, and you see they no longer grow, then do the fire cautery according to its quantity, and cut off one-third of the cure.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the treatment as we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that you should do the cautery with three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the size of the opening in the incision, and make a line for its width, and with your thumb press all around the cautery nail.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more gentle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from a fall or an injury, and that pain persists for a long time, and the medicine cure is not helpful, then it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery called "poins", and do the cauteries according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if he is healed after the first cautery, it is well;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	For the head of the shoulder, instruct the patient to repeat another cauterization on that one, because this treatment is suitable for the movement of the limb that is next to it, so you must do the cauterizations until the patient becomes well.
de meselerie	Of clumsiness or ineptitude
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The problem is not helped by cautery for a great amount of time, and the disease itself that comes from the rotting of pus and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Can you see the cauterizer, take care if the patient is at the beginning of an illness, and if they are cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not cut or remain still, and doubt that corruption will spread throughout the entire body, then make cauterizations on the head.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	Emboss the head again and the other side of the forehead to the end of the eyebrows.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and also on the two horns, and one behind the ear.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	And I let your hand stay so that the cautery comes to life just before the bone, and so long as the scabs come out in great numbers, so that the vapors of the large humors can come out.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	And cut off the mouse according to what it is in front of.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the meshing (of tendons) is everywhere sparse;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and if it is manifest that it pertains, so it is advisable to cut with these cauterizations which we have mentioned before, and cutting some in the neck, and two on the spine of the back, and one on the shoulder, and one on the elbow, and two on the other shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two on the groins, and two on the tendons of the leg, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	And warn yourself of the nails that are under the nostrils, lest you burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And at no time perform cautery on the bone of the finger joint, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that when you do more cautery, the more benefit it brings.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the sick do not feel pain from cautery as much as they who are healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the cautery be large or small according to the members and joints, as you will find in various iron instruments.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating him with the lead of flour mixed with honey and other remedies until he is cured.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When an inflammation comes upon any member and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then you should perform cautery on the member according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cauteries be made a little further in, when he is lying in expectation of pain.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the treatment of ointments until he is healthy again.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes cautery is done by hand and with the knife and the foot and the back, at the end of the nerve that makes the limb mute, and so if it has an abscess.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and no one should enter into it unless he knows the limbs and the ends of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	of wounds.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the sickness called "albaras" is old and worn out, and medicine will not do anything for it, then cauterize with a cautery just enough to pierce to the bone, according to the quantity of pain felt, until the blenchour (i.e. the swelling) is removed, and the color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then apply the treatment of flour, of fenugreek and lentils with olive oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from colon and gall of goose, one part each;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it all be melted together, and tie it with a cloth, and apply to the patient as long as they are healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for the chancre by fire cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the chancre first appears and you want to stop it from growing, if you burn it with fire cautery, around the entire circle of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And all wise men say that you should apply fire cautery also to the middle of a carbuncle;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	And all wise men seem to me not good, because I fear that it will cause ulceration and corruption, and I have never wished for such an event;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and the most reliable thing is to cauterize within, at the cauterization called "circle", as we have said in many other cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation which cannot be killed
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it lingers until death or because of the superfluity that she makes or because of the old age of the sick person when he is decrepit (this means too much old) and he has little blood, or for long time;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you must see it hasten to death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	so therefore cut into the root of a small cautery in pricking.
aprés le laisse ensi.	then leaves it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	It will happen to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced with the cauterization at all, then this heat will be the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand at the middle of that illness called "adubelati" until the cauterization pierces the vein, and so arrange the cauterization that the patient feels pain in that manner that the course of the putrefaction is delayed.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cauterization with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness that is called "corrodens", and it's nothing but an infection of a member, because it corrupts the flesh just as fire burns.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in the one who can suffer fire cautery, then take out small and large nails according to what is fitting for the patient or the disease.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After cautery of all parts until you have eradicated the entire corruption, and nothing remains, then all that which is corrupted should be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the patient's cauterized wounds so that they suffer bruising with oil until the scalded areas are cut out and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After this treatment, generated from the use of medicines.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that a healthy child does not appear, it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if that does not happen, then reapply cauterization to those who are left corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this method is never cured with medicine or water in place of cauterization by fire;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but cauterization by fire is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment with medicine in division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of porridge that comes from the bones
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times, from the bones due to lack of care, a disease called "closure" occurs according to our understanding, and it is a serious thing that causes great pain.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the fire cauteries for this disease are according to two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is that you should stuff a caul (a membrane) like an egg with wool, and it be made of good iron to the measure that can pierce through all parts, and have subtle edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After that put the head on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail so it comes out from the nail hole;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let him wait for three days so that he begins to get purulent matter;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a poultice of fresh marrows crushed with string, and put the poultice on the whole night, and the nail will come out and be loosened from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the joint with puncture and care until it is clean.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted in flesh, and it often happens in hands and feet, then it is advisable to apply fire cautery of hot water;
et est en teil maniere:	and it is thus:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a needle of iron or thorn, and set the nail on it is to say, to prick warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and then set the needle on it so that it pricks all around; and then put a little warm water on it, and hold well your hand, and press hard with your hand turning so that the margin of the needle comes to the root of the nail, and you can find the warm water running deep just to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient suffer a little from the burning of the warm water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	and then he will drop off all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So let the hair grow after another, until you are searching all those who are in the body; then treat with ointments that inflame the flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some people shiver from cold or from fever or from another, so you should make four cauteries or four above the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one above the belly at the olive cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	so that it will stop trembling, and hasten the recovery of the patient from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of festering pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never do they appear by chance on the body without baths or festering pustules, which come from gross, corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	if it is fitting to do so at first when they appear that you make cautery on each head of the pustule;
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle cautery of fusel of myrtle, so that the point is gripped by fire, or from the root of aristolochia long, or at the cautery lens.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes when cautery is applied at the beginning and they see this manner, but they cannot increase in size or grow forward, but instead burst the superficial swellings that come from it, and are healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the arteries are cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Often great bleeding comes from the artery that is cut at the wound, or at the incision of the abscess, or by cauterizing the member, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a very grievous thing to stink.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And whenever this happens to anyone, if you hasten and put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and stretch it very much so that the pain does not pass away, and no more bleeding comes from it,
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then put on fire the cauterization oils many small and large ones until they are all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then apply one, or great or small according to the wound and as to where the artery is cut, and put the cauterization on that vein where you hold your thumb, and keep the cauterization there until the blood stops flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If the fire escapes when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then take it hastily another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease to apply that one after another until the blood stops flowing.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is near, and that no other harm befalls the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when the artery is cut without bleeding, it cannot be properly closed itself when the artery is large, unless this is one of the four ways we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	In order to treat with fire, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by binding tightly with thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to stop bleeding;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and if it is bound and strained as a result.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will put on a restraint of tight binding with cloth or tying things tightly above, or other similar things, unless it does not benefit.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to no one and he has not taken any medicine or remedy, then he must put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind them tightly until the bleeding is stopped from the wound and from the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and he must not move it, but the cold from his hot blood will often cause it to become very cold, until its heat is frozen and condensed, and stopped.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and seek to cure and remedies those who need it.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on treatments of wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have said this in the first chapter of all diseases in which it is necessary to apply fire or medicine hot, and the qualities and causes and the strumas and forms of cauteries;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and the head of that chapter is as follows, and I will go into this same place for the same reason, because it heals more easily when found in the same place.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first cautery, and therefore you must be more cautious.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter there are often evacuations of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to act foolishly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come in for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	When they come from such people who are afflicted with their disease so that they quickly die because of the hardness they find of their disease, and of the greatness of their misfortune;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and from these, one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of those who tell you the truth, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	wait, I am cured".
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is stubborn.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not good to trust only those who come to you and have this condition, but take greater caution in your honor than in your desire, and be firm without being feeble, of that which you are certain, and of what you can acquire.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	And instruct the patient with prognosis and diagnosis to determine when their health will change;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you gain fame, honor, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear children, Our Lords give you good understanding and integrity, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter in the form of chapters, according to what is before or behind a cautery chapter, which I have devised for you from the head right down to the foot, because you will find it easier to know those things that you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The full head is filled with water.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease comes often to children when they are born, and when the nurse holds the child too tightly around the head;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And sometimes it comes from a cause that is not known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those who I have seen have died.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And therefore it seems to me that I should try a few of these treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw that child because his shoulder joint was swollen with water, and his head became increasingly heavy every day until he could no longer bear it;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and he thought so greatly that he was dead, and this moisture had assembled itself under the bone above his spleen, between the kidney and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the wounds are so serious when the moisture is between the kidney and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you must cut a large incision in his head;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as ours, so that the moisture may run.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and in this case, the form of a spatula;
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more crusted and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the signs that there are cracks in both sides of the head, and the water spurts out when you press with your hand inside, and it does not come back;
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If you must cut open his skull three times, according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision extract all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After fastening the incisions with bandages and powder, and applying wine and oil, and leaving them so for five days;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then remove the dressing, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head be strained in size, and then give the patient dried meat of a few ounces of moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another manner of incision is that you observe or open the large opening of the abscess, and assemble the assembly of water;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	because it will never be seen;
aucune fois derrier;	nor behind;
aucune fois en destre;	Never once.
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never on the left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Therefore at the size or at the abscess opening, and the filling of the liquid, and the cutting accordingly as you have the power;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and beware that you do not cover the artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and if there is bleeding, so that the patients die from the decay of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	The head of the shoulder
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens that a person suffers from a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or at the worst, and the patient is old, and medical treatment does not work, then the last resort is to cut with cautery using what they will cut off both arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is therefore necessary, when you have covered the artery, that patients make their face towards their head;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after rubbing the patient with an rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then extract the patient's neck from all the cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look at where the vein is cut, and the veins of one are after the ears, and they are not returning;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then sign the veins of the groin, then cut one and the other with a good spatula, two parts long, until the vein reaches the bone, so that it is near the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	If you see, pour out the spatumile under the artery and cut on top, in the same way as it should be cut through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if its blood flows without any upward continuity of fire.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the arteries do not open at the feeling, it is wise to measure the quantity of the space three times larger, then sign the groin and cut until the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and that which is advisable to put on a wound with fire if it is six times larger, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the bone is still exposed under the flesh, then cut that which is pointed out as an abscess and drain the wound, and bind it up with cloth until it heals.
de emigrainne	Let goes
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When a head pain comes from old times, and cough is bad, because of moistness in the eyes and heat in the temples and an old forehead swelled up and similar things, if they are treated with medicines and all those cures don't help, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of their extraction, so that the patient makes his hair stand on end over his temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well with its pulsation, and is not very closed up until in many men who are too cold.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it is closed up, then strangle the neck of the patient with certain cloths, then rub him with any rough cloth, and pour water on him until the artery appears distinctly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatulate of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then scrape the soft skin lightly until you reach the artery, then tear it upwards with pins, and pull out well the threads that are on both sides of each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is subtle, then turn at the tip of the needle, and cut from that part according to the quantity of two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it is not cut, do not jump at it without causing damage all over.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And pull out six times on each side, just three.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, it is fitting that you tie two stitches of a strong double thread of silk, to prevent purulence in front of the sudden bleeding of the wound, and to come into view with the blood.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut the swelling that is between the two joints on this same hour, and then, if you see, put the cautery of the surgical knife into the bone until the joint is cut.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and that is the muscle work, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cauterization is a help to finish drying.
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is of greater help for drying.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, fill him with old cotton and put taut well-made tents.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when you remove them, treat him with dry medicines that produce charcoal, and with tents, until he is healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if without the cut of the artery so you do as you work, then hasten to cover by cautery, or apply the quick of vitriol and strain it with your hand until it is stained.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	And if you do not have that present, put the plaster on the shoulder until it is frozen, and apply the shoulder with cold water repeatedly, and strain it as needed.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And what is muddied and easier to extract from the artery is that you should cauterize the vein of this cautery, cutting it with two halves, but cut them well spaced to make its heat last longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too dark, they hold less their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	It must have one and a half inches of coarse iron between the two cuts, and when you have placed two sticks in it, and you heat the iron hot until it comes to the bone, cut the vein in two.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And let them separate between the two joints because it is not possible to solder all of this with fire in all of it;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	from tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes flow down into the veins that are on top of the forehead of the strong, and no cure is found with medicine which we make, and you see the face of the patient becoming red and flushed, and feel a pain in the front of the legs as if from cold.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and when the wounds are kept and moist so that the hairs of the paper are cut, and the papers are burnt with the heat of the tears, if need be for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it the ancient "cure contuse", and then you would tell the patient who has this illness to let his hairs grow out of the forehead, then make three cuts on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	And if it is one of the incisions such that two are made all around the forehead when the head is lowered to make a new cut, and the others are two on top of the papers, and you take care not to cut the arteries which are in these places above the papers;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And move your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and make each wound to be three times as large through it.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have prepared an sponge and some bandages to absorb the blood, then apply the spatula with two parts of it is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision that is behind the temple, to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Scorch the entire wound that is between the two incisions, all to the surface of the bone, then make another cut from the first incision up to the other second, and then remove that spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you prick at the base of the hairs with the "cultellary" instrument, and it is sharp on one side and soft on the other, do not prick too deeply, and this is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge towards the raw flesh at the puncture, and the soft part towards the bone, and let it stay until it comes to the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut off all the hairs that fall from the head until the incision is complete just at this point when the blood vessel opens up, and then make another cut in the middle division just before the other opening.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then extract the blood equally and express it by the vessel taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put a tent of white cotton in each incision, and cover it with moist cloths made of wine and oil and ashes, and keep away the stench of pus;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day remove the bandage, and anoint with a great quantity of watered-down plantain juice, then with Basilicon oil and other remedies for wounds until he is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Do not move your eyes.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When some veins come to be swollen by custom, and you see the eyes turgid and red, and weak the vision, and the papers burn;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hairs fall out, and in the forehead there is great pain, and the patient sighs;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Therefore you should know from these accidents that those materials and the swelling do not come but from many veins, and the kind of disease there is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to look at their forehead, then make a deep cut on either side of the forehead and another small cut.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And from the cut in the left temple to the right temple, and so the incision just above the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and pull your hand back from the nerve of the temples that move in towards the head;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is uncovered, so that all the blood seeps into an sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the incision and put cotton wool, and try to apply linen.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then tie over the exposed flesh with moistened cloth in wine and oil, and protect it from the heat.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is an ulcer, so that you rub the bone until blood begins to flow, then apply the cure of excising, which make the wound dry.
En teil maniere:	In such a way:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take two parts of wheatflower and four parts of colophony, and make an emulsion.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and apply this to the wounds to dry them out completely.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the rupture of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that falls into the ear is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or dust, or dung, or stone from a mine, or something similar like metal.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seed, such as wheat, barley, beans;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or something that flows out like pus and inflammation, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear, stone or some other thing that does not adhere to the ear or grow in the ear, if you put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see a stone, then take out any little bit of olive oil violet or sesame oil, and then perform the extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and let the patient vomit condensation, and stop the nose when vomiting comes, and put a piece of cloth or linen into the ear;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and hold the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	A lot of times comes fever by this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if she does not come fever, they should perform an extraction of fine pins, for it is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it comes through with the fine pins, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if this is not so, let them perform an extraction at the nodule with a fine thread of small suture;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not come through with that, let them make a chain of thread and pour the chief of the chain down into the ear, or through the passage of the ear very deeply, and seal what is around the chain with melted wax so that the thread cannot enter through the chain;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then the thread forms a knot, because a lot of times fever comes in this way as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come by that method, so it pricks at the blood to see how much comes out, and takes out the ointment, and puts in some instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and puts a little cotton inside;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then presses the glue onto the stone or whatever is there, and pulls it off.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	and if it should fail to work with all the things we have said, then hasten to cut off an ear so that the vein is exposed, and causes convulsions.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the way of cutting is that you first make the patient healthy from the head, and extract the blood according to its power, then place the patient between your hands, and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear towards the fat or as it depends.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and so let the wound be cut as one moon, until you come to the bone, then the tooth according to your power, and suck it out hastily at your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the cure until it is clean.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it's pus that forms and inflames, then extract it;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot come out, then apply an iodine plaster subtle according to this form;
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision from that spot.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think the pus is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many small pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then draw it out with fine pins and at the incision, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In water therefore it is said that one should spit into the ear and use sternutine of composites first, and fill the ear with thick cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be careful on that same ear or in water.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	But if it bursts because of this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If they do not (listen), then take many cuts according to the length of your body, and make them light and easy; and cast one piece on the fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and place the patients with one or two perforations in their ear and let them sit on it; from one side of the other, with fear and pain from another stone over the ear that is in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and cease not to make these stones into stones until the pain goes away completely, and then she will pass it all out.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, take a joint, and pour one of the juices into the ear, and the other joint into the fire until the softer joint is burned.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then make another of other joints until the pain goes away completely, just as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of flesh, if it is of a small body, like a wart and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is of a large body one can feel it, so extract the pinpricks.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	And this is the lighter thing to be removed that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms, anoint the ears, as you cure so we have said in the division and when treating distillations, if the cure does not profit, it is good that you look at the ear by sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if there are no worms, if the throat has small pinpricks, and if they do not appear, then the chain is of this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it may be narrow from below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And pourpose the most subtle head into the ear according to the amount of suffering in the patient, then let it swell throughout the entire body;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	make this often until all the veins have appeared.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	and if they do not appear to be cut, then wrap them in the vein of cotton as I have said in the pierce.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not appear as we have said, administer distillations just like the ancients did in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, so that it may take on the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether it is of silver or gold, let him take away from under at the little passages, and over the joints to dilate;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and by pressing within the dilation of this silver well-made instrument, and if you see the rasp will catch on and pull through the tip with a cloth;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicine in the channel, and let that run into the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then pour into the rasp all the cloth, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or comes out near the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the patient feels it inside, and if the distilled poultice is heated by fire as well as when we dilute it in the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and keep her from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the rupture of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without any ears or damage to their ears.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And the same thing happens in adults when there is a stoppage of blood or pus inside the ear, and this stoppage can go all the way into the ear canal if it is not treated.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And sometimes the hearing returns, and one can see well again.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	So when it goes all the way in and one can't see it, this is often due to an increase in suffering from various conditions, and so you should put the ear of the sick person in the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If you see the swelling around it, if the work is totally smooth because that's its form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And so it and trenches before and behind all smooth, if it does not touch the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the swelling is of flesh or bone in the ear, if you have fine punctures, and cut lightly until that flesh is all bone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the incision goes all the way into the ear, take a fine razor and light it over a small fire, then put it on the bone of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the swelling where patients feel great pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and make sure not to rub the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then put a tent in the ear according to the size of the perforation, and apply Egyptian powder on it;
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Make this every day until the wound is healed, or take an arsement and put the poultice on with water of roses, and powder over vitriol broken.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see a boil in the ear, apply the arsement and move another poultice moistened with olive oil and wax until the boil is drawn out.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal him as soon as he is cured.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if it comes out of blood, plunge an sponge into cold water and wrap it around the ear, and apply other treatments to remove the blood that are in treating hemorrhages.
de la char des papieres	of the fat of paper.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This remedy which comes in paper when the eyelids are moist and dry, should be stretched with tongs and forceps, and shaved off with a spatula from its root.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put vitriol on it afterwards.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	If without cutting off, you cauterize the lenticle with subtle cautery, and the cauterizer cuts after the incision is made.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and often repairs are made, without anything remaining at its roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return again.
de la gresle	of the flesh
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Often come in the eyes paper some things that seem to be worms in their form and hardness, and because of this is called "granulon", and it is a collection of gross moisture on top and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	the abscesses are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	take care if the granulon moves from one side and the other, and it's a light thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Fend the wound so it is clean; then scorch from each part lightly; then take hold with pins, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cover the wound because it is too painful for the patient to feel a slight pinch, do not give him anything.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the wound is large, assemble it with stitches and treat until it heals.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it is small, do not put any pressure on it, because the ointments restore it immediately and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the gravel is falling inside the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and pick up the gravel with pins, cut and press it from one side and the other.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	And if the paper is stretched by the incision, it causes no pain.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And when the gravel is hit, clean the oil of salted water, and treat the patient who suffers from char so much that they are healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that gets stuck in the threads of paper above, and this has caused more deaths among children with no one to care for them, and it gives them much pain to their eyes, and they come to catharsis in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears fall into their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and because of this they lie on their faces to the ground again, and sleep there, and their paper above their eyes is moist with the exininach that causes inflammation and appearance has changed because it opens in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the lock of meat with your hands and feel the swelling between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of this work is such that the patient puts their head in your hands;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a linen cloth, and cover it with a tent made in the shape of a circle according to its content, one quarter for each part, then place it on.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with both hands from one side and the other, so that the quarts are assembled in the middle of the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture a small gash cutting into it to a length no greater than the wound you made on the vein.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and let the skin into it so that you see the quarts;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and many deaths result from dislocations due to a tear in the membrane, according to the shape of a piece of white fatty tissue.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Remove the wound then at once to the entire piece of cloth gauze between your two hands without fail, and turn your hand to right and left until it is spread out.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and keep in mind that you should not add anything to the wound, lest you come across the entire spectrum of the liver just until the oil, lest you blister.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the tear does not open at the beginning of the wound, then cut a little bit into the wound lightly until it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then draw it as we have said, then apply the cloth in oil and water, and place it on the wound, and draw back the bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who crush wool and put it on to corrupt the moisture that is left behind.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the physician, so as to be healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes to a joint with abscesses hot, so the cure of splinters satisfying as long as he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs from paper.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When the hair grows back after being shaved, do not shave it at its natural growth, and let it grow for a while, so that it does not harm your eyes, and causes the coming of sorts of diseases, such as excessive sweating, swelling of the skin, and bluish discoloration, until this is the cause of eye damage;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and they are treated in four ways:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by cautery, putting fire together, or by water according to what is in front of the chapter on cautery, and being done either by incision and suturing or by tying, according to what I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary to place the patient's head on a clean cloth, then turn the hair of the affected part towards your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	She has been converted, this is good.
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	If it's not so, if you inject a needle into the upper filament;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and if the margin of the paper or the hairs are between these hairs, and pull the filament up from above to the whole paper, and turn it with the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then cuts down from under the paper, under the hairs closest, to all the spine, from the large to the small;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then pull the filament, and put under the paper a small linen tent and a drapery, then cut up the paper with an edge like the flame of myrtle, as far as you see the quantity extracted from the paper which is depicted in all its size.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if he has taken the paper to write down a great quantity of the parchment according to what the parchment is softened.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then writes everything on the second line above what you signed, and begins large writing just below a small.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and if one of the incisions is near the natural hairs in the size of a root, then pour some powder into one of the two corners of cut, and scorches it all.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then gathers the two lips to a seam with an awl at all threads of fine linen, and sucks up the blood, and makes it dry on the surface of the fibers above both squares at any sticky things, as if you had seen this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if this does not happen, so you do not have cure, then leave the seam and the hairs just for 3 days or 4.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then treat the wound with sewing and binding of things dry, because the paper reappears at the moment of the wound and its assembly, but the seam is weakened (as the ancients said), and it's a work with fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	and if it has another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you sew the paper of a figure like as the fuel of myrtle, as we have told, three times close according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut off whatever is standing above with equal force according to its shape.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you do not have the power to hold the tongs, and things are not even, then take an awl or if it has one thread, and poke into the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	And take another branch of the great fir tree, and the second branch of the small fir tree, and equalize them between your two branches.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then tie your hand equally, and tie all the skin where you have stitched, just as we have said; then sew both lips of the wound together with stitches, until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with croton oil and similar ointment soothing.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the papyrus are converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	so if you use what we have said about the incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitches in both places are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The care for the chains is according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	And so you must turn the paper and parchment inside according to what I have told you, and then make two chains by art, and two subtle ties just as long as the paper and the width of the measuring stick.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut at both ends of both parts where you hold the thread;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble one and the other subtly above what overhangs from the parchment of the oil, and strain both chains from both parts together.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let him stay thus for a certain number of days, and the leather that wraps the strained joint will wither and dry and become more firm, till it hardens by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it lingers, if the copier has some strength, then treat him until he is healed.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound has closed with stitches, and if it is lifted again, and the hairs do not pull anymore.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the form of two joins that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the incisions are such that you will take a very fine needle, and put in the soft and subtle thread of silk.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then assemble the joins and needle both subtly, so that the lengths of the threads are one palm long.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then put in another fine thread of silk briefly, and no the finer thread.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then place the patient's head on your safe side;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and let the sun shine so that the wound is declared, for it is a subtle and small wound; then prick the needle all along the root of the attached hair, and pierce quickly through the skin until you bring it up over the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then pull the hair up to the point of the needle, and push the needle into that point, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then withdraw your hand until the hairs that are freed flow forth all the way to the skin with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the needle is pulled and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull the needle downwards to all the thread that you have ordered, until the needle comes out through the hole above and you see it by the sight of the oil.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	And so you will pull the hair and thread, and oil it and leave it for two days or three, until the hair is rooted in its place and grows new flesh above.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hairs are short, follow one of the long hairs from the shoulder, and let yourself be lifted along with it, until it is stretched out and then lift.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil's spoilage
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this illness, called "aleacrati" or porphyria, comes to the skin, it has two forms:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and one unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And in the treatment of this, it is done that you cut open the wound, and apply ointment to the lips, and put linen bandages inside, and bind it until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And do not use this remedy only for curing people with dried up or constricted things.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	But if you make it worse, the disease will be even more severe than before.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but for softening things, as in fenugreek.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the arse of water or ale and the seed of flax are cooked, and ointments made from frozen water diluted in any oil, wrapped in a cloth, and given to the patient.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And if your remedy is valuable, that you keep it for yourself so it does not spoil according to the form in which it was before.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and this work we have spoken of is not the fire that burns with a different form than its original form, that it does not return according to the shape in which it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the blood which comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness that is below, truly called "axacrati", and is a natural and accidental condition.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from a wound and tearing and cauterization and similar things.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the vein of the body is that you prick an arrow, in which it has one double thread, and the nail in the flesh, and you make it pierce from the left side to the right, so that the thread appears in two joints of the arm;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then tie the skin above all over the arrow, and cover it with a broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the image on the paper returns according to what is needed, it's good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if that one is not, then take the razor and put it in the wound, and turn the paper, and make two cuts on either side of the paper inside.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the chips of the two splits of the two angles of the incision which you have cut be there, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure will be as in the letter that has no «i griesche»
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then cut the bone clean, according to the quantity of its costs that is above the paper, then join the two divided parts, and sew with a thread of linen;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the cure for what we have said about soft medicines and poultices, until he is cured.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the sickness comes from a cut or a stitch or a cautery, so that you should make a plain cut below the hairs of the papers, and according to what was said before;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then turn between the second and third fingers of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one must perform the work according to the shape of the disease, for it is very different in form, and the skilled masters make an apparatus from any kind of poor material so that the figure returns to its natural form.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patients themselves, according to those things that are required for the work and instruments in those various conditions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Suddenly of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this stitch occurs on the palms in a certain way, so that the paper above is soaked with white oil and cannot move or do its natural work, if it is necessary then you must put the point of a rasp over the paper, and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	And the extent as pinches, until you apply what is sharp to the sensitive area, which is neither too harsh nor too thin, so that the patient cannot suffer if it is too harsh or causes the oil to bleach.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And if your incision, do not burn the assembled skin lightly, so that the paper (scab) reappears according to its natural form.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	And when that assembled skin is healed, and there is no occasion for the oil to be poured onto it, but rather the swelling of water is lifted, and cold wine is given.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then place a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and put on the lard oil moistened in abundance of wool.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after three days, apply to the wound with a bandage and similar things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of fire cautery
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	The joint can be in two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	it is one joint which appears to be inflamed and swollen like the skin after frost, and another that does not appear nervous but seems frozen with moisture, when touched with iron and cared for as if pinched, it cannot come.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both seem to begin towards the great artery, and grow little by little until they cover all the eye and all the light and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the way of making an incision is that the patient puts his head on a clean cloth, then opens his eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lifts the paper in his hand, then coils the joint like stitches of fine sewing, and extends it upwards;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	Then take a needle, and put some horsehair, or goat hair, or oxen hair, and tie it tightly;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	And double the point of the needle a little and sew it into the horn, so that the needle goes all the way through the horn, and tie the horn with a thread and attach the end to above, and scrape off at the entire length of the hair where the wound is located, until the red blood comes out and the black hairs appear on the hair just up to the head; then cut the remaining part in the root of the nail bed for a small distance, and leave it as nature intended, so that there does not come from the incision the flesh around the nails as is customary;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And at times, only attach the horn to the wound and the thread.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then the scorching is applied to all the surface of what is sore, as this is the form.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And that the scab does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the wound is not perceived;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, pour some powdered salt into the oil and make a poultice on the collarbone, and let it remain until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat him as necessary so that he may be cured.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	and if the warts are not nervous and you cannot poke the needle in, and the wart does not take entry, then this similar appearance of a wart is cured with medicine.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have told in the division, and if you see them cover, then apply oil to the patient, and take the spatula lightly in good shape according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And press the inflammation under subtly, and if you see that it shrinks and the reason is pressing hard, then distill from your mouth into the oil made of litharge, and red wax, and let the oil rest for another day:
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then re-commence the other work according to this same operation, until she is completely hollowed out.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no objection to the oil, as with an abscess, then apply the medicine and let the pus, and cure the abscess first until it is healed; then resume the operation in the same way as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the skin is troubled by the lump in the oil with great damage, so that it weeps at night, and you lance one part of it not entirely, let there be no blood.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill in olive oil red colour which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the fire that is born on the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Are there some men who are born without red hair, and cover their baldness with a wart, and restrain themselves against the paper and the thorn; and it seems like a rose on a bust.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the ulcers are so that the patient puts his healthy head on it, then opens the eyes, and stitches all of that with suitable threads to its shape, and supports it with strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cut the first one off, and go to sawing until the end, and be careful not to bleed on the wound.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and if the incision is with spatula as we have said in the incision of the warts and with small forces because one is unable to remove it soon, like the shape after this chapter shows.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is completed and all of the char are removed, then apply oil from a broken twig or distill it with colored wine and similar corrosive medicines, and place on the affected cotton wool with beeswax, so that it be secure at the abscess.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it does not improve and the affected area is covered with a scab, and you doubt that it has healed, then leave the oil and let the abscess be soothed.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	and then return to your work until it is healed, and similarly apply the char to the affected area in the oil by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But for all cases, it is necessary to lighten the remedy of each weak oil by the natural way.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	And of the accidental vein, when working with iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not press my hand on any of these wounds until you see that this member is suffering from the wound.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes.
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These eyes are red veins that are covered on the surface of the eye, and they tolerate their treatment on the eye and weaken them every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	And then is the art of first looking at whether the oil is hot, cold, hard, or soft, and there is no other disease but the hardness.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	and therefore bind it in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head on your clean one, then tie those veins all over according to his wisdom, and let the subtle ones double up according to this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be two times one by degree in the form of a circle:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	and then bind tightly those subtle veins, and suck out the sore hour after another, until you see that the hot veins have been removed from the oil.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And be careful not to prick the oil with the points of the lancets, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you only suffer what is due to women.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, if you dilute in the oil a yellow and green vinegar and red for to corrupt what is remaining in the swell.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you do not have power to remove all of this in that one hour, then apply on the oil soothing things for the eye's pain and leave it for some days until the pains are eased and be sure of having removed the abscess, then resume according to this manner as long as he is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	And this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the boil of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The mire so named "arissati" fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you cure it with cautery and medicine hot as I told you, and it's not healing, if there is an infection in it, then you must cut open the abscess, at that place where it may die, and remove all the moisture that is in it, until the bones are exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bones are exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, if that is the shape;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "aspere chief", and it should be made like iron in that chief part, and you should pierce it like a file like as it is in the present shape:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put the new bone on top of the corrupt one, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand onto it slightly until you feel that corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this whenever you want, then restore him to his former state of medicine.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	but if the liver is inflamed and so is the body of the bowel, and they remain like that for 40 days, and he does not recover and there is no discharge or inflammation, then it can be said that he is cured.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	but if this is not the case, then there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula back to its original position according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and that you uncover the bone the second time with iron, and with sharp medicine, and when he heals from uncovering so it is punctured according to this form, and let the clavicle be fixed in three angles, and the fistula be softened until just above the head as you see.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then put it on the bone near the cartilage, and pull your hand away from the oil for a little while, then turn to all the forest until you penetrate the bone and the patient feels it with what comes in this way if he holds his hand over his neck.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the patient to a healthy diet of dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when he bears and hardens his limbs, let him eat this material on his neck.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the issue of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are open all the time, and it does not come to relieve the head, or softening, then you must tie up the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then he heals, then you put ventouses or haterel near to pierce for relief, then put on the oil which is made of ice and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the oil, and apply it with plaster of benedict and strips.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of dressing wounds is that you take soft bandages, and wrap each one four times, and then put one on top of the other according to how many there are in need;
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then tie under a hard bandage to form, and then resume the suckers to draw out with pain;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the suckers and let the oil tie him tight day and night, and if it is tied too loose, so that you tighten more;
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the tie after day and night, and if you see the oil repairing, that's good;
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	so you resume the poultice and bandages, and the tie and suckers until he is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Discharge of the pupil
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruptions come to the eye, it opens, and there comes forth from the papers as if grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	And therefore if you cover the eye, the wounds are such that you put a needle in the root of the part below where it is just above, then put another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the eyelid;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and pierce it, and let the first needle according to its position;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut the vein of the double thread and tie a part of the eye shut, and tie it well, then pull out the needle and apply olive oil moistened in abundance to the wound;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it stay until the threads come together with the eye, then treat the olive oil on comforting things until the wound is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And sometimes the wound is bound up with a cloth around every quarter of a circular bandage until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes appear swollen, then prick at the spot with a sharp needle that is submerged in olive oil and wipe away the moisture so that the swelling goes down and enters it immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then extract as much of it as can be made whole.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the oil of the bowels
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease called "alcunnati" is only caused by a bowing that is assembled in the oil, similar to the flow of water downwards, and it's not actually water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and if the appearance of the wound is such that you make the patient sit upright on a specially prepared bed, then take hold of his head with both hands of two parts, and push it until you see the bowing coming to the top towards your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Now it is moved, and does not descend or break away; and see how the light shines on the patient's things as they usually do.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, you know that it is sick, and the movement of the bowels is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you sit the patient between your hands, then take a fine knife and do upwards on the thin membrane in the corner of the eye with the continued stitching of the membrane and the crown, as long as the bowels are loose.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it has been drawn out, if you distill it in hot, sweet oil mixed with honey or boiled fenugreek and honey, then the patient is cured from another cure until they are healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	of hot oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have the same symptoms as blood in the division, and what is needed for piercing;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	as according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, cross fire of the light from the sun, and tie the healthy oil very tightly;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then place the paper of oil on your left hand if his eyes are to the left, or on your right hand if they are to the right;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then grasp in your right hand if his eyes are to the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if they are to the right;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Instruct the head of the instrument to put its point on the crown by the growth of an arrow in that blackened oil droplet at the less tender part; and then pour the instrument which is called "almagda" effectively, and twist your hand so it penetrates into the blackened oil droplet, and feel when almagda comes to life in what appears to be empty.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the measure of the almagda instrument be exactly one finger's breadth from the root of the nail to the end of the dark spot.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of the oil.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone through the paper due to the clarity of the eye's cornea, and then put the instrument exactly at that spot where the water is, then press downwards in one direction after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the fever has come down now, so he sees the patient in front of him and the instrument on his table.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After rest for a little while, and if the pain comes back in the second way, put force with the instrument, and when it is set and does not come up again, gently pull slightly by turning your hand now and then;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	And then put in the water a little piece of silk gauze, and take out the oil within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put in place the oil-soaked cloth or a moist linen soaked in rose oil and plenty of rue, and tie it with pure oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Also, and those of our time, let us use a common broth with plenty of rue.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the powder cannot be inserted into the oil because of its hardness, since there are many men with very hard eyes, so you should take up the instrument called "alberit", for it is in the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And therefore prick only the conjunctive, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then put in a little oil, as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And when the work is completed, the surgeon will come to attend the patient in the dark chamber where he lies on his back.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	And be careful of all movements, and give gentle food, and do not move his head or right arm or left arm, and bind him according to his disposition just as if he were tied the day before.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then take him to the same dark house, and let him see his vision, and make him look at some things, and then put the limb back in its place seven days.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And it is not necessary to do that in the patient's room after the incision now, but it is necessary to alleviate him, because his illness rises rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If an abscess forms on the wound, you will dislodge it seven days after that, and address the one who cures abscesses.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when he is appeased, dislodge his eye and put on a linen face to cover it for one day, and be taken back to that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then he will come from the house little by little, and will turn into his case;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and knows that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And then one came to us who was from the Irag, who told us that in some far-off lands they practiced a certain kind of operation, by which they treated the water, but I have never seen it or heard of it in any book among our people, nor did we know of it.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and perhaps this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the likenesses of the forms of al-magd, because those who do not know them see them.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they are very clear.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the head of arsenic from this same subtlety, and the lower parts are in threefold angle.
de la char sor le neis	of the shoulder bone on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	No limbs are ever born with uneven or misaligned feet, because it is so that some seem like scorpions by a multitude of points.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if it is some such limbs where the bone is thick and blackened with red flesh, and some have bone soft of white color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In such cases of those limbs that are soft and not thickened, it is necessary to sit the patient between your hands against the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and cover his nose, and pour on the salve to those limbs, and let them burn;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	till you can bear to sustain it on a small, fine, and subtle spoon, for as long as you know that limb is entirely bled out.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains any part that cannot be covered, then apply all of the subtle signs to lightly.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if there is no wound or abscess, then cut as it seems to be.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it's malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize until the sinew is stained and all the cartilage is cleaned, then give or give as you wish, hot water or vinegar, wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the medicine overcomes and moisture comes into contact with the place just above the throat, they know he is cured.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, they know there is a bone hidden in the above os, for which the signs do not come to cut.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	And so it is necessary that you put a small thread of flax into the wound, and let it be bound by hand with a knot, and there should be no space between each one, it must at least be.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	And put the patient's head into the flax thread so that it gets into some pain, and treat with an odorant until it comes out through the nose inside the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times do it this way to children in school, and that is a light thing for the one who has to do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes by the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes by the mouth with the other hand, and check one after the other while we are in the flax.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do as you wish to know that the flesh has not been corrupted by anyone else, then take the child, clean the wound, and anoint the infant with Egyptian balm, and set them right upon the fire if it is before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do as you wish three days or more, until the balm has corrupted all that remains of the flesh.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put a poultice of horse dung for several days until they are healed, and if it needs to be made from dried medications, then use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, because one distills the oils and the medicines or poultices:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it should be of silver or lead, resembling a lampshade, like a poultice, and conduct it similarly;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you see, then make a bandage tight, and let the discharges plain so as to cleanse the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And put some oil or any liquid on the head to keep it moist.
de la char sor le neis	of the shoulder bone on the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Often the head swells with pus because of a disease called "telul", and it grows and becomes large abscesses, until it is filled with something to be seen.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and therefore it is advisable to make a poultice at the beginning, and let the bone all burn, then put on him the cautery or the hot medicine.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if it is delayed in being poulticed until it has grown large, then take care if it is hard, of the fresh flesh, the poor sense.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	If it touches him with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when he strikes once, so much evil comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	But if the abscess is touched with a soft touch, not iron or harsh color, and you see whether it can be fully covered, then open the patient and strike with fear, and treat the wounds with drying substances and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nails are struck and scratched
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Knowing that when many solutions continue to come into one of these old cartilages, little profit is obtained in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary to see whether such an event occurs again, when you examine if the wound is fresh and all of its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and therefore add two stitches to the wound, then treat him until he is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are cut on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their wound until they heal, then reassemble the two stitches, and bind them, and sprinkle above with powder of dragon's blood, and burned incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put on the powders a piece of plaster made from strong or other kinds of resin, and let it dry until it hardens, then treat with binding until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of sewing if you have assembled the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we said in stitching around the navel.
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Inflammation inside the lips has occurred like pus in abscesses, such as grains of sand, and smaller and larger ones.
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	therefore it is necessary to return the lips, and split each one open, and take out with pinches and cut into each part.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then apply the liver to the wound after the vitriol incision is broken, until it is stained.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then apply the liver of onions, and treat the liver with dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh around the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times they grow on the gums next to the teeth that the old people call "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	if it is fitting to hold it with the tongs, and cut at its root, and let the blood flow or the vein.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then put on the liver vitriol broken, or other restraining and desiccative powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if that one returns after the incision, and it often happens, if you cut it a second time, and cautery.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return to its place after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are forms of ulcers that cover.
des sordens	from sounds
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	There are no times that they gather at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scales which are ugly and rough;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and no time do the teeth turn black and yellow and wormy, until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	it is advisable that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be on your lap, and reset the teeth or scales as soon as they appear, until nothing stays.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and do the same for blackening and greenish, yellowing and other discolorations, until they have disappeared;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if one has removed what is at the first reason, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If this does not work, then repeat the operation on the second day and the third day, until you have completed all.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And know that the teeth have need of various forms of instruments to cut and file, according to what the work shows, because those who use razors to avoid damaging the teeth have other forms than those which are used between the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these forms and others be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is fitting when you treat the tooth that causes pain that you delay treatment for as long as possible, because it should not be delayed.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	Because it is a highly flammable substance, just as, therefore, you should have no excuse for delay.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to treat it, if you wish to be certain of the tooth's swelling.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times does the pain come to the patient, and he thinks it is due to a tooth, and he has the good tooth treated.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and it does not depart the pain completely until the evil one is removed, for we have already wanted to do this at those healers.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are sure about the tooth that is causing it, then it is fitting to burn around the tooth entirely with a small spatula, very hot, in order to protect the gums from all sides.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then the teeth are scraped with your two fingers or fine tongs at first point by point, until they are well exposed, then firmly close the tongs.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the head of the patient be in your hands between your two thumbs, and so tight that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the right tooth directly into the broken place, and if it does not spring forward, take out any of these instruments and put them inside each part lightly, and move him as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if you see the teeth are broken and bleeding, then it is fitting to fill them with cloths, at the places where they are torn.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you gently grasp with tongs so that it does not break while grasping.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is fitting to carefully put oil over the gums in order to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be well guarded that you do not break it, and keep one part remaining, and tell the patient again by the malice of the root for greater pains from the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	But beware so that you do not do as the unskilled servants of the lord who, by their haste and boldness, break the chariot every time and do not bring me such things as we have told.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but sometimes they bring about this great illness by the root of that disease remaining, or by breaking the chariot as we have often wished.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the teeth are three, so wash the mouth with wine or ale and with salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if blood comes from the wound, which often happens, then apply the vinegar of Vitriol.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And if that does not work, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of the abscesses are in that manner because if you mute the teeth first, they have long points and thick roots, which do not double up when you pull out the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	And these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And are broad branches so that they do not fold up when pulled; and are made of good iron well-made, and are pointed to hold the tooth.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains after pulling, it is advisable to put cotton soaked in butter on the wound for one or two days until the pus is melted, and then take out the tongs called "algefri", because the flesh seems like a sore.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	And let them be done in this way as a lime, and it is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out from all these ties, so it is fitting that you uncover the entire chariot around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say, a lancet, for this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And if it's a great cut and large, but not so that it breaks apart, and the root bursts out from this, then it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If that does not happen, then take all the roots, so that the forms come after.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help yourself with this instrument that has two blades, for this is its form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front of the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like great pincers, for this is its form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And if this root is strong so that it cannot break, and you have taken much of the roots from there.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also of other roots, which are not counted.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the wise masters cleverly treat themselves with their own instrument, according to what his works and illnesses show, because there are some of these diseases that the old do not teach instruments for the variety of them and for fear that it will break or on other bones, or putrefy, if he seeks the roots that it is needed, as I have told you, and aids with movements, so that this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and well-held to hold the bone, which does not slip away but can be held and removed;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the person to their proper medicine, if it has putrefaction in the bone and it is small, so that they can use all this instrument;
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the teeth appear not according to their natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know whether the teeth are new after the tooth, and not in its proper place, and one cannot be satisfied or fixed.
adonques lou raie;	so the cut;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is swollen with the tooth, take that instrument which has this shape, and is like a small beak, and is made of iron very sharp in some way:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the file is held in hand for a few days to soften the hardness of the tooth, and because one does not move the other teeth, and if it appears that we can fix it, take a small amount of lime as much like this shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and is also as when one makes the flint into needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and by striking the flint in small points and hard blows, as long as it does not move
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the blade is flat by the end and does not remove anything; if its edge is too sharp and it bites the tongue, then it should be honed until even so that it does not bite the tongue and corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the tooth is in front of a wound, either by percussion or by falling out, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts so much that he cries out.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	so it is advisable to bind them with a thread of gold, because the silver threads become green and rotten, but the gold never moves.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And so let the hairs grow long or too short not too thick nor too thin according to the space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you see the teeth directed towards each other, take the file and put it double between two healthy teeth, then insert the clamps between your teeth, one by one or more, until you hold them securely to the sound tooth on the opposite side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then resume the covering as you started, and strain your hand carefully until it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And if your ligature is tied to the root of the tooth so it cannot escape;
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then bind the clamps with the thread to tongs, and tie them together, and place them so that they do not bite your tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then he lets it remain thus constricted as long as it can stay in place; and if it is loosed, or the child cries, so that another child may be stretched.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it remains and serves thus for all of its time, and this is the form of the bones and the shape of the two sound teeth, and the two missing ones, just as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when a tooth falls out, it is placed back in its proper place, fresh as new, just as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not put it in the place of someone who is untrained and unsound; and never make a tooth of raw bone, and place it back at the place where it was defective, and fasten it as we have said, so that it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the joint of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	No cases occur when this joint comes from below the tongue or by nature, so it is born thus;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accident of a seared wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the wounds are such that you open the patient's mouth, and hold his head still, and lift the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the nerve in the neck, until the tongue is loosened from its place, and if it has hardened or another wound, and this happens suddenly from a blow, then inject the vinegar and cut deeply at the joint;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and guard that the wound is not too deep, lest there be injury to the artery below;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done this, lift the patient to fresh water and asepsis, or cold water, then place under the tongue a linen bandage;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	And the patient with each night the disease will suffer, so the limbs cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if they come from blood clots, then apply vitriol on the limb broken.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if they do not swell, then cauterize with fire at the same time as before, which is good for them.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then the doctor will try another treatment until they are healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see a foul odor or red or black flesh, so the patient does not feel it, and do not touch anything because it is a chancre.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if he leans to one side and there is moisture, then pour the pus, and gently remove it with a spatula from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	And if they are not careful at their work, so that the glass is broken and cuts until it is stained, then return to your work as soon as you treat all force.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then lift the limb up high and straighten it out, and treat other patients until he is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	The swelling of the throat.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	There is no occasion for the throat to swell, which are called "godath", and the proper name is applied to both sides, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they do not heal, be careful:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if it is thick pus of small sense and flesh color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, for fear of its hemorrhaging.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But let him wait until he is dead, and then you will have to take him apart, for it would break by itself.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if his flesh is of white color and the roots are subtle, then have prepared the instrument to cover him; but first look whether the abscesses have closed and are calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then place the patient in front of the sun, and his joints be sound; and open his mouth and press the linen between his hands, and push the tongue beneath all the instrument, for this is its form.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and it may be of silver or of subtle tin like our scales.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Can you push the tongue to all of this instrument, and then see the abscess, if take the lancet and make a puncture in the almond, and pull it forth above what is possible.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	And take out any threads or yarns with you, then cut at the instrument, for this is the shape that looks like one of the forces;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And the head is curved in both places, and they are very good, and made of iron or tin.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then use a pair of tongs, because that is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	It is pierced from one side and the other side as well.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have pierced one of the almonds, pierce the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot and cold water, or cooked grape skin, or myrtle flowers, and similar things, until the wound is closed.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the cure will be complete when he is healed;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And sometimes there are abscesses born in the throat besides the two almonds, so if they are filled then like the two almonds binding.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was near the throat, which is to say the small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had it very close the throat so that the woman could not breathe through the constricted passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and was dead if she remained like this for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses are standing so high that they have been filled with two rains through the two entrances of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I therefore immediately took action, and placed in one of the incisions, then poured forth fire, and a large portion of sulfur.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	and then fixed another incision on the other perforated side of the abscess, and held open the mouth and pressed the tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After applying the cautery to those abscesses, and cutting off a part of them, only a small amount of blood issues.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and then they cut off the conduction of the throat in the woman, and now she began to drink water and wine, and did not cease cutting at that abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscesses reopened again, and filled up what I had previously drained, until it became very large;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	so then I inserted it and cautered inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	then he remained without growth.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I separated from those parts, and only God knows what was done after that to him.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When it descends into the hole and falls and is extended and lengthened, then it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if she is too large and rounded, then she is called "vein".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When she is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit from it, and you see that the swelling of the abscess subsides, and she is subtle, then it is wise to copy her.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and those which are rounded and assembled do not grow longer;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and if she is red or has a bloody color or black, then it is wise to close the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	Because there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is then advisable, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, about its size and length, that you sit the patient in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned earlier.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then cut off the appendix at the root, and pull out the tumor, and strike it with a blade on the two struts that I have mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cover just the surplus, which is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	because if you cut more than that, it will grieve your voice and speech.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we have said about the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patients have fear of cutting, it is necessary that you use an engine to cauterize the fearful senses.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cauterization is cool water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And the patient puts their head on your healthy one, and then presses the tongue with the instrument that we have said in the fire cautery, and binds it with hot vinegar cloth, so that it is not too thick nor too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And when using this instrument, so that there is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And put on the chief either a hair or an ointment, just like the dressing of a spoon, and place the instrument all over the medicine on the wound.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	And the patient is gouty on his chest, so that the sweat and mucus run from his mouth onto the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, but to the bile;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand all over the medicine and press on the wound, the quantity of half an hour's time, until you see it congealed and the pain from the medicine is assuaged;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see that, take cotton and unfold it over any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and pour the instrument into all the cotton in the tube above, until the cotton sticks to the wound;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the fire cautery is complete, then let it dry, and cast after four days or five.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you have need to restart the fire cautery of the medicine, so that it is restarted, and after the cautery has dried on the wound, with cotton stuffed in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him be raised with cold water, and let him be cured of gargarisms until he is made whole.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This cure is safer than the incision, whether it is a cautery.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is cured with fumigation in this manner, take celery and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in an alembic, and heat them.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	And let the wounds be closed with strong glue from hard earth, and using this kind of instrument on your head.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it can be made from either lead or arsenic, and one of the fingers pounded into the mouth of the sick person until the vapour rises to the eye through the wound, until the eye is numbed.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	Afterwards, repeat the operation many times until the eye dries, and make sure you do not perform this at the beginning of the incubation period of the abscess, for more things happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not perform this unless at the point of inciting an abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if that instrument is not present, take a needle and put it into the head of the wound, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	For the fire cautery does not help with milk or cream because the vapor weighs down the mouth, and this is a good cure together for salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it happens to the throat when an arrow or a fish bone is swallowed, or nothing at all.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	Therefore it is necessary to treat what you can see, and press the tongue on the sun at all the instruments, so that you see if the thing moves.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And what is not apparent and returns to the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit, so that the flesh be cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	In case if the thing becomes exposed by vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of onion, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and tie the sponge to the finger, and then the glutens.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it arrives at the elbow, if you feel pain, and then pull out the arrow.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come from what we have said, take an instrument of splint according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	and let the curved instruments be at the head so that they can more easily enter into the throat, and lift the head up high.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it die, or press the bone into the throat.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and make sure that the patient is pressing the instrument, because he feels it sharp or rough.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the boil erupts, or if he treats it with force to all of the instrument equally, until it is forced.
de la sansue de la gorge	about the cutting of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	It is never cured without the help of medicine, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines.
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when it does not benefit him, then look into the throat of the sick person towards the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound open, then when there is just one small incision, or with fine tongs that are worth it.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this is not worth it, take a small hairpin, and push it into the throat of the sick person, then pour or give some warmth to the body.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is afflicted with fever every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full glass of cold water and open the mouth, and let it flow in towards the senses to be swallowed, and move it with your hand often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if as soon as he begins to feel the water in his stomach, he vomits.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	and if he does not vomit as we have said, then submerge the sick person in boiling ash, with the instrument that I told you in the process of smudging the wound.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, because she will fall more often.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of fumigation if there is a vessel with charcoal inside, and it is covered by a cord pierced in the middle, and with that pierced part are the joints of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then I will take the fumigation, and the patient puts his head in a cage and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not enter, but comes from above.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and now the snake will fall, and if it does not come out, then continue the fumigation many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and the patient suffers from thirst, eats foul and putrid things, and does not drink any water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then thus the art of surgery is most suited when it happens through this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it is so that when one sees it, resembling curved tongs to enter into the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and has the appearance of a snare, and has roughness like lime, so that what it takes will not loosen.
et vez ci la forme:	and thus there is this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The surgeons of the abscesses.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many signs of an abscess are, according to what the memory comes after in this book, and differ in perforation and size;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two manners, one of which is similar to the other, and because of its moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for those that are within them or in their body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	because the abscesses in the head are different from those in the cheekbone, and the abscesses of the shoulder are different from those in the joints, and each has its judgment in the book.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if we do not pierce an abscess when it is not ripe according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are such abscesses that it is necessary to pierce them when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, just like abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	When an abscess comes from between the joints, and it is left until it is putrid in the meantime, by chance if the tissue and nerve of the joint have decayed, because that is the reason for the contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Where the abscess is near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is dead, it will harm the principal member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or if it is near a foundation, and pierce it so that it becomes dead;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is not necessary to pierce an abscess when it is ripe for digestion, but rather that you pierce the one near a foundation, so that it does not burst from within and become inflamed, and form a fistula;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal in great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	and it is wise to know the nature of the perforation of an abscess, which is dead according to completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and of swelling and of the dullness and sharpness of the abscess head, and other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is wise to sit down the perforation where it is more dependent on the abscess, and in the place where it opens.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and if the perforation is at a long distance from the body, and when the abscesses are in hands or feet, joints, nails, arteries, and on all those equal places where there is no pulsing.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	When the limbs are swollen, by some cause of inflammation.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the groin, if it needs to be let out, leave the perforation open until the inflammation is completely resolved, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	If you pierce him in front of this, so it goes away by letting loose the body from the poison of it, and is filled with a great amount of filth;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance they harden the lips and the deepest part of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if an abscess is pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limb has need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary to bring in small pus-filled wounds, small perforations;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large pus-filled wounds, large perforations, and many cuts according to the similarity of the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if such an abscess has formed in which it is necessary to cauterize the wound and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become like the bandages, and is muffled, so it is necessary to do the same as they do with the buboes;
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	And if there are those that are split into three angles, and if there are those who have cuts like the wood of myrtle, just as abscesses from Angers;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are those where they make a round cut, and other sizes and similar cuts.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who do not have a head, as if an abscess is superficial, it is fitting that you pierce it cleanly;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is fitting when the abscess is large and has accumulated great swelling, and you pierce it, so that not all of the swelling is removed in one hour, but only a part;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then stop the abscess just as it is, and on the following day do not remove any of that;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this repeatedly over time until the bowel is whole.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Even if the patient is weak, or a woman in childbirth, or small children, or old men who are decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	But if you expect that the patient will be saved every time with the outcome of the pus, then you will not be disappointed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore be careful with this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound is present, and look to see whether the wound from the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it's a simple incision, then apply tanned linen or old cotton to it;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it's a great abscess and there is much pus, it is advisable to apply one tanning on each side so that they meet against each other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have pierced in the abscess a part of the skin, and you have stitched it inside, so it is necessary that you fill it with old cloth or with linters of linen without moisture, and tie it to this point every day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the bone, and the physician of ointments until he is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if you come from blood, bring anointing with cool and clear water and cold oil, and wrap it around the limb covering it many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the blood flows persistently, so that he is governed and cured, and the poultices which I have in my hands in this book, and if it is in winter, and the pus is very hot, then it is necessary to put on tentes and wet cloths in wine and in lard.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in this state, and the pus is charred, so it is necessary to put on wet cloths moistened with water and oil, or wine and oil frozen, every day, as we have said;
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then remove the abscess and clean it up and treat the patient if necessary, as desired.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this is why one must investigate universally in treating abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Or you have said how to go before starting the treatment of abscesses, and this is where the chapter begins.
des soros	of sorrows.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where small abscesses come from the head, and are like threads, just as a spider's web, or like the wool of a goat, there is also much resemblance.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some fatty ones and swellings as well that get worse with moisture just like boils.
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and some that are hard and stone-like to cut, with no doubt when the arteries are cut, and they do not cause any harm.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the marks on the neck are such that if you know how to use all the instruments called "entremoissoires", because of their shape they come after, what kind of thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then they do it on top of the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is empty, if it scours without leaving anything to remain of that skin which contained the moisture, for it returns again when nothing is left.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then plunge cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment into it if present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, plunge it into water and cloth, and apply the wound until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And let those who are left behind sleep at night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the bandage, until you know it will not stay in place at night;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with ointment as it suits, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscesses are tight in not to be grasped, do it according to this shape, for a long time;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And I shave all your hair, and the scab from every part, and place all your care to treat for the chest where it is.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if they cause contractions, do what I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do also thus with the abscess if it is pus-filled, and to cut it open and to cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the size of the pus-filled abscess will be cut and drained if it is lighter, because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if some of these abscesses or swellings are not due to moisture, and some that I have copied or extracted from the swellings of an old woman.
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess like a stone hard, sharp and white, that cannot break.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if any had been burned with it, one would have done the same wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses that come or swellings, whether they arise on the head of children and the roots of the ears, cut open so as to reach the lowest part, to make the bowels emerge;
et les cure si com il covient.	and the cure as it requires.
des scrophules	Des scrophules
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times abscesses occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and near the liver, and sometimes they appear in other places or at the joints, and are very painful, and often joined together one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each ulcer is properly within its own coat, just as the navel and apertome of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the similarities to these ulcers are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are those that contain moisture, and those that are malignant, and they do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in which you see the good condition of the bone at the elbow, and is like the color of the body, mute on all sides, not irritated at any part nor by the nerves of the neck or artery nor in the canal, and is not deep.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	so it is fitting to copy it over, and scrape off the flesh from each part, and leave the two lips of the wound as if cut with knives, as we have said in apertomes of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And let the touch of fire command the patient to let his hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not stop bleeding, apply a plaster of vitriol to break it up, or some powders that will stop the blood, and bind the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and let it remain until the abscess is allayed and the wound is mollified, and begin to discharge.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood has been drawn off, return to your work until you have completed it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then seek to know if there are any small swellings that will remain after you cut and lance.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if he has much blood in the neck of a scrofula, so that it cannot be copied there, but only tied with a strong double thread, and left to fall away with pain.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then use the dressing of old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then apply a cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you cover the whole cranium, it is advisable to assemble the two lips of the wound and now sew them, before any swelling remains from the great size of the skull.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if it is advisable to treat at the root of the, and apply force, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofulas that swell above, cut into whichever place they open and bleed.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and cut it in such a way as is said before, in dependence, and then put in tenons with ointment and similar things, if it infects what remains of the infection.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment in jars, until it is cleansed.
de squinance	of inflammation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancient men spoke about the cutting of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw anyone in our land do it, and this is the writing of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	But for those who have been strangled, it is to be believed that the cutting of the throat known as "epiglottis" should be avoided;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And do not help them by that, because all the veins and the swelling of the patient are at those who have had sharp wounds in the mouth, or throat, or two fingers.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the channel of the small part, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to escape the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it outside of three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the incision through the tissue, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those who have this condition are suitable for section of the epiglottis because there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long to enter.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the masters are doubtful, then it is fitting to stretch the skin of the throat all the way down to the chin, then cut through the scarred spot until it comes out on the surface.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and escape the vessels of blood, if you see any, and then strike at the superficial part, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the tongue of the chin which bursts forth from the jaw that is broken, and by the failure of the voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and let the wound be covered with a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour is passed because of which one doubts strangulation, assemble both lips to the wound from above with the tongue so that the entire tooth may be taken out.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines which make flesh swell, until it is well.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	But it should not be done until the throat is completely frozen, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the disease spreads.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And the ancients ordered that the wound be left uncovered for as long as the malice of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four days. And then they ordered to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was cured;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a young woman take out a knife, and she stuck it in her throat, and cut off part of her neck.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was summoned to cure her, and I found her in the same state as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound, and I found the blood that had come out of it, and I realized that she hadn’t cut her vein or any other vein by chance only through the throat, and the blood came out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I was about to leave, and stitched the wound, and cured her so that she became healthy.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and it happened to the young woman that she was red in the throat, and returned after her recovery.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because of this I thought that there was no fear in the larynx.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This swelling is called "gullet hernia", and it's a large swelling the colour of a hazel nut, and it occurs greatly in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	And there are two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	Nature (cause) and accident (happenstance).
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Where there is no natural cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is according to two ways, because one is like a lump or swelling, and the other is like an abscess that comes from an artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and it causes fear, and it is not advisable to apply fire to burn with fever only in those who are small, and he examines and seeks at the surrounding area;
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as if there is no lump, and it does not cause pain in any way, if you cut it, as we cut the nose, and you show all its face, unless there is anything else.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And search well all of them, and the physician as it is required, until they are perfectly cured.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways in which it happens, of which I will tell you all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and as for this is what I am going to say, the difference between not and wound.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that when it is an abscess and fever remain, until the boiling is done, and it is completed with putrefaction;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	and then the fever and heat rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the wound there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains a sac, which is its own sack and resembles the color of the flesh, and begins to swell just as a jam does, and becomes larger.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to two types, or wounds, or moisture, and much of color are like what I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of no one, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument called "entremoissoire", as its form will arise or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of examining abscesses is that you prick or moisten it more than what you find in the abscess, and twist your thumb a little bit until you know when the swelling has pierced the skin, so that this becomes according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then remove the middle part, and be careful that it does not splinter.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the abscess is moist or has dried up, then cut it in such a way that its color is like what I said about other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if the middle part does not come to be moist after, know that it is fatty, so cut it in a cross, and take hold of it with pincers, and lightly scrape off each part, and wear a protective cloak where you feel it, until you bring out the wound clean with the needle.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot treat it well, then cut it to pieces so that it does not stay there.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	But if it stays, it will come back again many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it stays for just a little while and the pain is not severe, then apply the wound with some corrosive powder or poultice, strap the wound tight, and put on soothing things like cauterized leather, and treat other treatments until he is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the pain is great, then cut off both cheeks of the wound, and treat the one who causes inflammation.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the veins are swollen in opposition to this or something else, and you hasten and apply the new vinegar solution, break it into three parts, let it lie for two or three days, until the wound has stopped bleeding, and the inflammation subsides.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then comes back to cover what is left behind where it has been forgotten now.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Behold here are the forms of internal humors, and they are three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	large and medium-sized and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and in it are three quarters which are called "albares", and one which is called "brebe", and they come in three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium-sized, and small, for to encircle the abscesses of a fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and are also like the needles with which you cut the sources, and they are of yellow citron-iron, or iron, or silver, and move well those who are yellow, and are more suited for penetrating into the black pouch of a fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	And are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Grans, moines, and small ones, according to the quantity of the size of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of ulcers are like many similarities, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	great, small, and medium;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if there are ulcers that have two hollows of three kinds also;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if there are ulcers that have three hollows, and are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if there are ulcers that have two hollows and ulcers with only one hollow, and are of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all these are necessary in their own turn.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these is cut off because they are pricked, and from such ones there are those who do not cut much more than from one side, where the skin burns, so that the vein or nerve does not bleed.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And those who are inserted with foreign objects have the membranes returned in their hands, so that the patient does not lose them when opening abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	great, small, and medium, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use it more than in the joints, such as knees, arms, and elbows, and similar places.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and at times another small instrument is made, resembling the skin of fistulas, according to this form, in order to stain blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it in no place at all, for whoever has performed operations on the veins and arteries, and in no case returns to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never do the breasts of some men swell when they start to be corrupted, until they resemble the breasts of a woman;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain swollen and inflamed, and whoever wants to cure them, if it seems proper according to this form in this line from g to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then burns the fat, and applies medicine to the wound with charcoal, then brings together the two lips of the wound to the seam, and cures until it is healthy;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast swells downward, and is swollen for its size as in women, then cuts through two seams on top, according to two similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one is attached to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from g to g;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and extract the fat, and apply what we have said about clothing and powder, and what is necessary for the treatment, until he is healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if he is not healthy, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the congealing of blood, so it is fitting that you fill the wound with wet cotton in a corrosive dressing;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let him wait until he has consumed the remaining and fat, then treat him until he is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses from the arrows
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from under the arrows are hard swellings or have ribs, and when there is much moisture in them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	These then that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from the line 5 to the line 8:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the entire bow that is in the abscess is empty, apply the wound with fine cloth, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cloth, and treat with ointment as much as necessary until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like swellings of scrofula, treat it as we have said for cutting into swellings, and if the wound has an arrow sticking in it, apply cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the cut of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut, and the skin is burned which is above, if it brings many abscesses, and it happens just as often that it comes back in from the vein.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if the abscess is near the artery, so it is long within it.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your two hands, you will sense a disturbance.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is because of the vein, if there are red marks around.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and this is madness to cover up the abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits and around the neck and in other areas, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to abandon the iron treatment, and those who have head problems must also give it up, and for those with swelling of an artery, cut through the skin on a long bone.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then cover the area around the neck with linen, and carefully expose the artery in the webbing, until it is uncovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then pour the wound with a needle from under the one, and pierce it on the other side, and tie the artery with two threads in 12 fingers, according to what I have taught you in extracting two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then point the arrow that is between the two threads of an inserted instrument until the space that there is, and release the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply a dressing on what hurts so much that the wound bleeds.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat this infection until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is by the size of the vein, so it is fitting that you dye with your hand what you can from the abscess onto the skin, then pour the needle from under the wound that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and tie a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie the bandage, just as I told you, or tied to one of the two parts with two fingers of the hand.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread will not be produced, tie an other needle to all of II threads below the bandage at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in IV fingers.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut the bandage so that the excess falls out, then cut the excess of the same measure and leave what is tied.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on the moist bandage in vinegar and oil, then apply treatments for tenements and ointments until he is healed.
des apostemes des ners	They are abscesses of the fingers
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	And abscesses come to the artery and vein, they come to the fingers when they are swollen, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often in the joints and in the toes where there are fractures, and it's an abscess, and its color resembles the flesh of a corpse, and is worse than other conditions with pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when they are constrained forcefully, then the patient feels pain, and it is not felt deeply in the body, but beneath the surface.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And he is mute from every part, and does not move at all, neither forward nor backward, nor below or above, and one who is in a joint cannot be covered with iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	in case he suddenly contracts.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are in the head or on the forehead, cover with gauze or a cloth.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, if he has nails, and you cut them at their root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if he has the abscess to open, and scorch, then the bone, and he sews the wound to the ribs, and the patient should be cured as long as he is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	of great boils hanging down.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Nothing happens to the abdomen and no other part of the body except for this one, it is a sickness called "fungue" because of its resemblance to an abscess, and has subtle roots, and coarse bones;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and in it are small ones as well as large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw a man who had two large abscesses in his abdomen which were very similar to fungi and there was no other difference and they were white and had small roots and had been broken open and were rotting due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I copied them and found that one weighed 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces, and the wound from the incision was such that if you look closely, the patient is moist, and the color of the armpit is white and moist with subtle roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If they prick at the base of their nose, hold your eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For when cutting comes, there are often great flows of blood, and if you do not wait, then quickly apply the cautery.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient experiencing fear and anxiety from the incision of the iron, prick the pit on the back well done, and tie the artery as we have said, and let it remain two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain it, and do not cease to tighten the pit on the back until he pricks the artery, and pierces through with it, feeling its work.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are large, then fear yourself when cutting at the same time for the abdomen, but you can well cut off half of it, and then cautery so that it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Now cure the wound, and make sure that you do not cover the place where the blood flows red and poor in sense and from the eye.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	It's an enchanted wound, and I came to this cure for chancres afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil is formed.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of a boil comes from cautery to a wound or a laceration of sinew, and is on the belly with some boils, as happens in other routures, or when blood cuts through veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is from the wound of sinew and through the boil, and the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and there is little pain and a large opening with various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press on both sides so it returns, and then comes back, and by chance, if it has scarred, and becomes larger at the entrance of the bath and for great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it's a light thing, and opens well when you press with your hand, do not constrain it.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it's for pain relief, then open with these signs of a large and hard abscess, and stitch according to its size.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it's for ventilation, then if the patient is soft at the chest, and the wounds are examined so that you look at whether the appearance of the wound is due to the blood of the artery, or the vein, or ventilation.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it's necessary to leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Because there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter of apostemes for the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	and if the appearance is due to the intestine or the stomach, then it is fitting that you instruct the patient to tighten their belly, and extend themselves straight, and stitch all around the wound.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command the patient to lie on their back between your hands, then go around the injured area that you marked, and stitch half of the abscess above with all the long stitches.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie him to a strong thread, or a cord of very thick silk firmly, and make sure the wound is closed.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then spread half of the incised area over the wound and put a poultice or an application on it.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find the thing tied to the wound has been removed, then put an intestinal poultice outside of the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the wound, put it in its original place and take away the surrounding swelling.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery causes harm or pain, go calmly around it, then return to your work and take out two arrows, and put two strong threads in them, and put the two arrows back in the place where you made them pierced.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess four levs above the arrowheads, and if you see it, pull out the arrowheads, and let the wound heal as long as it will, and chip away at dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	If you cut it when it is slightly open and has begun to heal, then treat the one that needs it, and follow what we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and drain the blood or the moisture that you find, then treat the wound with what it needs, and close the wound.
dou chancre	A skin sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division regarding similar sores and how one must treat with medicine, and how one must avoid using iron treatment;
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and say the sore inflames in the marrow, and take great care with treatment, and the ancients said that when sores are on a person where they can be scraped off like a sore on the nipple, or in the groin, and similar places, and it should all be removed at the beginning;
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when he is great and old, so it does not suit that you approach him, because I have never seen a sicker man;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	None of them have ever been saved in front of me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And for the ulcers when he is in his own bed or can be taken out, as we have said, it is that you do not purgate the sick man of black bile at all.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make him healthy if he shows signs of overeating, and afterwards make the sick man lie down to work on the ulcer.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then throw out your ulcers or cankers, and scrape the head of all parts, and leave nothing behind in the bone.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And let the blood flow freely, and eagerly examine well by hand or by anything, and if it causes a counteraction of the incision of an artery or vein, then cautery as long as there is no bleeding.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then instruct the physician to proceed with another remedy until he is healed.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy (or edema).
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have previously discussed the symptoms of dropsy, and in what way the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each one, and the remedy that is done with medicine, and which one is healed by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is swollen only;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not touch iron in these two similarities:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympanites and yposarches, because it is a mortal thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore when treating this similarity of dropsy called "eclites" which the physician does not profit from, and the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsy, as if they have stomach issues and similar symptoms;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If you do not touch with iron, because there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see a patient of great virtue, and he has only dropsy alone, and he is neither too thin nor too tall, then do thus operate:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	lift the patient upright over your hands, and let the ministers press the abdomen towards the lowest part of the foot, then take the spatula with a spike according to this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let them pluck from two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	with a point, and it should not be so deeply inserted that it can come into the intestine when you insert it, and it cannot be withdrawn.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look to see if the dropsy is stuck near the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	If you must break open the abscess, do it on the third day because on the fourth day the poison will go deeper into the bone.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if there is a drop of pus on account of liver disease, break open on the left side of the abscess on the fourth day.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is caused by the muscle, on the right side, and you cannot tolerate that the patient lies upon the wound so that the superfluities do not run to the weak part of him;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pull it out, and raise your hand to the whole strip of skin between the skin and the sac so that when you scrape off as much as an acorn or less.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the sac so that the strip of skin comes back to its place, and this is the mark of the water, then pull out this instrument from which it is the shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it seems like a silver chain bound tightly, and is made of iron or arrows light, and in the lower part there are small holes.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on the other side, three more holes.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on this side, and one on that side.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the nails are cut like a reed, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes write on the reed:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	on the top is the alhemel, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it now goes up on the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	now you should empty one-third or more of the blood, because if you take away more than is necessary at this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit with the arm, or they will faint, or death will approach.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to the amount of his virtue, and according to what the disposition of his virtue signifies in the sick person, and his feet;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then hold the instrument and retain the water, and it is now retained by the membrane which stops the pus that is on the surface of the ulcer, as I said, so pierce according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then resume the instrument another day, if you see the sick person suffering from it, and take a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this day, and beware not to become foolish until there is but a small quantity of water left.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	and if you doubt the patient, and take much water from him, if the remedy of burial or hot salt is used, by sweating or bath, and in the sun, and if they drink.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the healer of medicine desiccates as much as it is able to heal, and cauters on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the water, just as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stoning of the genitals
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	There is never a child born without some kind of defect in the genitals, or if there are defects, they are small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If you want to proceed quickly so that he can pierce all the small spots very subtle according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put or pierce a subtle bone from the bottom, and tie it in this way for three days or four, and when he wants to make urine, then open the cleft, and let him urinate, and then set him.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and in case it does not come out at all, because the urine that comes is not allowed to be closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If a broken bone is of the foot, then it should be treated with poultice made from broken bone, as we have said, if it swells.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the puncture in their own flesh are blackened, because no one is born who has a puncture at the head of the penis, because they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot be cured because the matter cannot come to the marrow, and this is a great sickness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of treating it is that the patient lies on his back, put a stick through the head and cut as wide as the width of a grain of barley, so that the punctured piece comes out, as it seems to be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be careful not to increase the bleeding that often comes out, and if it does, stop the blood flow and treat the wound until it is fully healed.
des pustules de la verge	of swellings on the penis.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Often there comes an abcess on the vein, and it is an ugly appearance.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and some are malignant and others not so much.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	If it is necessary to press them at one time subtle, and strike all around, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian salve.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the ointment is applied diligently until it is pure.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the bath is malignant, of foul color and odor, it is fitting that you apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have struck it, and the skin is torn when cutting, with part of it inside the flesh and part outside, if necessary, then remove the part that is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and if it is sewn, the ointment.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you cure the entire thing together, if not assured that the cut of the vein is perceived, and blackness and corruption come to the vein and the wound.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When it is appropriate to shave everything that is black and rotten, then put a plaster made of honey and flour on the skin, which is made from pomace of grapes and figs, and apply other remedies until they are healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	If they come with blood, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	Fire cautery helps in both good and bad conditions:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	which is to say, when there is decay or corruption.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the root of the twig is corrupted and withdrawn, it is advisable to insert a wooden dowel into the opening and let the patient urinate.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the hair grows back to the head of the twig where those who have not been circumcised have wounds or abscesses, it is advisable then that you burn it with a needle instrument, until the ties are loosened and the root of the twig is released from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	And if this is a grievous injury to be treated with cautery, then it is fitting that you burn at the spot on the cheek of the penis and around the foreskin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then serve it up gently between two and one inch, with some fine linen soaked in cold water, so that he does not burn himself.
de la circoncision	About circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is no less a hindrance to continued bleeding as other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	all the way that we have done this work with our own will and properly for children, since it is to their best interest and easiest treatment.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	The ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have wanted the greatest part of the masters and doctors who performed circumcisions in the past, especially those with great experience and skill, as well as those new to it.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If it is cold outside because there are two full moons, and by chance if someone is struck above and does not move below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	or the wound heals over again and there is great pain, and with the mutilation that is not assuredly fixed to the point of the member;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and to the inflammation of an ungainly wound by chance the iron escapes and the wound heals, and many times it is born again so that it has no need of further healing I have wanted.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the purification which is done with forces along the entire length of thread I have found the good fortune of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, the nail grows equally in all parts if it is cut short in one place.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread is tightly drawn within the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and if the manner of the first operation is such that you make the child think it, if he understands, then only tie the thread around the stick so tightly, and just let it rest in all the ways possible.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Now hold the wound between your hands straight out, and set back the strength between your hands or under your feet so that the children do not see them, nor any of the swellings;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then put your hand on the vein and blow or press it, and pull it up until the head of the vein is drawn out;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then cleanse it well of the filth that is assembled around it, then tie the vein with a thread of two strands, and then tie it under one stitch to another stitch;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold two stitches apart with the second tie to the pouch and the point, and cut between the two stitches, then draw the vein hastily up to the head of the vein;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow slowly at first, for it is the mothers;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to put powder on it and cover it with that same powder; and drizzle glue made from a half cup of melted fat of a swan cooked in vinegar rose, mixed with good oil and fresh rose petals, and let him lie on it till the next day, and the healer will treat with another treatment until he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	When applying ointment to a wound if it happens that:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	when the two sides of a wound are tied together and stitched, and also when the stitches are as thick as the equal part of an arm.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	when the pus inside the wound escapes from the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	then it is necessary to extend it on your side, in such a way that the pus makes an abscess.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and let the cut equal, and if you cannot hold fast to your joint, then take tongs, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if it swells for three days, and that which is below the vein has inflamed, then let it be left until the abscesses on the skin are calmed, and the scorching is done lightly.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If you cut it as you move, and keep away from the vein part, it will not do harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Therefore treat the swelling pain with powder, as we have said or treated with powders, and if you cut too severely over the measure, it will go up above, and do no harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore cure him then, as we have said, until he is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	A retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to stone or ice congealing in it, or a bowel obstruction, or a blockage from a tumor, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine is not flowing, and you see that the retention is due to a stone lying in the neck of the bladder, it is advisable for the patient to be laid on his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and the knees are placed on the back, and he extends his belly from the upper part of the back, and restrains the patient so that he cannot move.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and thus the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the stone above, because the urine is flowing out.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if she does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is fitting that you administer extraction to all the instruments called "siringue", because there is a form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let it be of subtle silver thread, like the feathers of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let the bandage be half an inch long and be subtle at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of the issue of urine if it happens that you take a double thread, and tie one pound of wool or linen to the head, and pour the head into the "siringue";
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut off the superfluousness of the linen and pour it just onto the head of the "siringue", then anoint the "siringue" with oil or butter and rue, and place the patient on the bed, and let the bladder and the urethra be moistened with watered-down oil and olive oil.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then put the ligature more lightly on the vein, until it comes to the root of the vein, then double the vein above over the wound;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then pour the ligature before it gets to the bladder, and feel the patient's pain coming until it gets to the empty place, and that is not done according to this order because of the twisting where it should be going.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then pull the thread all along the vein little by little, and the urine follows the vein, then extract it, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and re-pour the ligature until the bladder is empty, and adjust the patient's pain.
des maladies de la vessie	About bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorches or blood comes into the bladder, or when putrefaction is assembled, and you see water and medicine distilled there, then do all the instruments called "clepsedre", and it's like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if there are three punctures:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	I d' une partie et i d'autre si com tu vois;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And the left hand because that is where the cutting of the medicated salve will numb well the joint, if we can treat the moisture, and blow as needed when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see getting your medicine into the vessel, put a cork stopper in the moisture, and pull out as much as possible;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you pull out the moisture from the cork, and then seal it tightly again;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	so the moisture will enter again, and come into the vessel now, so that the patient can feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of the subtle bladder castor oil, by which the vessel is castored;
si est ci:	If so:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And is of silver or arrows, and the head is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below at the joint where the ligaments come loose;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep skin and put the moisture that you see clotting on it, then tie between the two shoulders a strong double thread, and heat it over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then pour the head into the clots in the vein, then strain your hand on the skin until all the moisture is extracted from it, so that the patient feels the juice coming to the vein;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you don’t have the skin, take a piece of parchment and make a circle on it, and then pierce it all around;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then put in the bottle, fill it strongly with these wounds, then assemble the circle as we assemble the nail, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it up in the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do it as you did with the bladder, of pressing to your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have said in the division of stones and the extraction of assembles of medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and have said the difference between the stone which is encased in iron and all the signs, and in which stone one must perform cutting.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you about it clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stones which are imprisoned in the bladder occur more often in children, and this is a sign that they have eaten an overabundance of bile in their subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and when I open the stone, and irritate the patient's penis, and he urinates many times, and then becomes emaciated;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and at a great cost of these stones, the foundations are undermined;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and healing in children occurs until they are 4 years old, and is very painful in the elderly, and is like joint pain that occurs between joints and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to clean the patient with a cloth, in order to treat all the blood that has accumulated inside.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For this does not come up when seeking a stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Take the patient by the hands and feet, and draw them out and move downwards, so that the knee descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not go up again at all.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then make the patient sit between your hands prepared, and let his hands be below his knees, so that the bladder is all inclining downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then look at it and touch inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not flow onto the toucher of all, so that thy right index finger is anointed with oil from the left hand, then either the patient has fever or thy left hand.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	And let the vessel stand still in its foundation, and choose a stone, and when you feel it at your groin, if it has set up against the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press it onto your groin, and let the vessel go away from where you see cutting.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands that he extend his right hand upwards towards the necks in the groin area, and with his left hand, pull out the skin beneath the necks in the part where one makes the incision;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then put the spatulate instrument on cutting, so that it is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And put it between those who are between the necks and the foundation, neither in the middle but alongside the left side of the bladder;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And it shall be straight above the stone, and your shoulders should be placed at the neck or chest, and if the size of the stone is wide in front, then let the length of the passage according to the quantity of the stone, not too much.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	In case the pressure, if the shoulders are on or at the chest, it will suddenly fall in place.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	And see where there is a stone or an angle, and margin;
si est griés a issir;	if it is grated to come out.
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is something on top that resembles a glitter, and shines, with a light issue.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	Therefore, if it has an angle and margin, make the incision larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	And if she does not jump, so it is advisable to strangle at the nails which are just like a file on the head, in order to strain the bone if it will not heal.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you pour drink some of the subtle curved instrument at the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot put it in like that, so enlarge the wound to let pus out, and if there is no separation, then strangle with vinegar.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, so pour first the largest on the belly of the bladder, then cut it up, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then you should soak it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	Because two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	He dies, or urine comes out afterwards because he cannot sew.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but force yourself to cut, or to debilitate with nails, until you cut it by pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of onion, aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put above it a damp cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then revive the patient on his neck, and do not release the bandage until the fourth day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, so that the limb is moistened with oil and water, then treat him with ointment of defernion and ointment of basilicon until he is cured.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if an abscess comes to the wound and causes corruption and congelation of blood in the bladder, and holds back the urine, which is known in this manner so that without its escape with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Put a dressing on the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains there, the bowels will be corrupted, and the flesh will rot;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound with cool water and clean cloth, and apply the aid in all ways as you know, until it is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	It is fitting that all the remedies you treat for him should bind both knees and assemble the medicines upon him.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is in contact with a bone, and fixed there, and the urine cannot come out;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	So if the treatment you mention is repeated many times, then we are excused from this operation.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Before you begin to cut with iron, according to this form and so that it is at three angles fixed in one piece:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Now take the file and put it on the inside of the bowels below the stone; so that she cannot come again to the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then pour a lighter wood into the bowels slightly, so that it may reach the stone.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	And turn the wood slightly on your hand towards the stone little by little, so that you can pierce the stone from the other side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If it comes to that the urine, then press your hand on the one that is remaining stuck to the stone which is inside the bowels.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it breaks apart and escapes with the urine, and heals the patient.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, tie the file below the stone and the other above, then make the bowels straight to the stone between the two ligatures, then extract for them, loosen the ligature, and clean with a congealed salve the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal the patient completely.
de la piere des femmes	About the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	There is often a stone in the uterus of women, and if it occurs once, then the cure is painful, and they are defended for three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one thing is that perhaps the woman is chaste;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second thing is that one cannot find a woman who is knowledgeable about shaving, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third thing is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is knowledgeable in this art of hands.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth thing is that the stone in a woman's uterus is more hidden than the stone in a man's body, because it often requires a deeper incision, and great fear arises from this. And if you need to do this, then it is advisable to take a shave well knowing, and at painful cost, and if you don't find one, do not choose a subtle shave.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and he presents a wise remedy for the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and he commands that she do what you command of the inquiry of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and examine very well whether the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is fitting to pour some water or earth into the hole and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, then she must constrain the thing under her hand, and he commands that she pour her remedy or with the sick person, and wants and presses his left hand upon the bladder forme.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	and if she finds it, then it is fitting that she move it from stone to stone of the entrance of the bladder until it comes out to the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Puis cover up the stone at its root on the lower thigh where it meets the middle, and so that there is movement in that part; and feel the stone in that area.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his two fingers above or below the stone; and let them be tied to the first little joint.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then pour a draught of water into the joint, if you feel the stone so far down the wound that it may come out further, and see that many kinds of stones are:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	that is to say, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and rounded, and which have holes.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the signs to recognize the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if they do not swell, then he puts on the patient a piece of glass broken, and holds it for an hour until they are stained with blood;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work, until the pain is overcome, and you have taken up the instruments that I told you in the extraction of stones for people to help you with their work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if they do not swell and it is an artery that has been struck, put powder on the limb and apply the straining mixture of poultices and bandages, and do not attempt again, let the wound alone, lest the patient die.
puis cure la plaie.	then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the wound is cooled down and the pulse returns, then return to your work, until the pain subsides.
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia in the groin
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Rice water is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white pus that forms below the knee, where it contains the yolk.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and is called "pus", and it is not properly contained in the yolk itself, unless one believes it to be another egg.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and this is the skin around the vein between the white tissue which we have mentioned;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this does not happen.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this water ram is due to weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads out that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And no time comes if it happens from percussing on the veins, and this moisture is so red with many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it's pale declining to yellow, or without red, or black, or white, and this happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of this assembly, because if she is white and swollen like we have said, it means that the abscesses return, as long as they are like an egg, and do not open the veins, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the own skin, then it means the abscesses return with a part of the egg, and because of that one thinks it's another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white cartilage, he feels well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you see that knowing the color of the moisture, it is always on the inner quadrature, because the form is thus before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Therefore those who come after the surrounding area judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure with iron, it is fitting that the patient be made healthy according to our power and the replenishment of his body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then he covers him with a cloak on his back, on one high thing, and places upon him much cloth.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then he lies on his left side, and instructs the minister to lie on his right, and extends the rod to one of the two joints on either side of the joint.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Take the spatula and pour the liquid on it, and strike the skin of the joints from your long joint to your little finger, and make your cut straight in devising the skin of the joints just up to a smooth white space, and scratch subtly according to the power.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the smooth space of the water into the large puncture, and extract all the water, and then put on your [appliances], and look at the space above.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the skin of the joints, but only the smooth space itself;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut all or in pieces, the same way on the chest of him, so that if you do not cut well, the blood will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the blood escapes to your over, then return it to its place when you have completed the work on the smooth space;
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, gather the two leaves of wood from the knife to a costume, then heal as you would other wounds, until it is well.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the ulcer of corruption from another disease, it is fitting to tie the vessels that are suspended above, in doubt about the decomposition of blood;
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then tie off the vessel to all that is suspended above, and extract the ulcer, and heal as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if an abscess is assembled in two parts, so that they are like two twigs;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	so tie the other part in the same way as you did the first one, then wipe off the blood, and put a fresh dressing made of moist linen in olive oil.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and place another type of cloth soft and moist in wine and oil, and put on the two wounds, and cover them with double-draped cloths, and tie it up according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and fill them with wool filling in the same shape and assemble them by sewing in the neckline of breeches, and one of the shoulders presses on the lower back just to the top, and the other at the part of the joint.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two shoulders are placed on top of the two angles, and all assembled together the stricture in the bow of the breeches.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and at no time is this remedy of cautery used in place of iron, and that you prick a fine caulderic cautery, and cut the skin of the wounds, and heat it as we have said, so that the white sap contained in the water is uncovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take fire cautery according to this form, and pierce it at that spot with awl-like instruments, and scorch it with this subtle cautery sharp:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cut in all the ways that you can, as long as you mark it.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and keep the fire from touching the eye;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is more saving.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and beware of complications from blood and be cautious about the wounds that come with it.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if no harm is done to you, or an abscess forms or complications from blood, or any other thing, then treat what causes you harm according to what has been said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this work because of its horrible nature, so perform a perforation, as I told you, and it is that when you are certain by the meanings we have said that rainwater is laid up, then seat the patient on the bed lifted high.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	cut into the abscess in the lower part and to the entire wide surface.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and so make the incision large enough that all the liquid can run out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the wound, bind it, and let it drain the remaining liquid, then cure until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the pouched cloth does not allow the liquid to drain from the opening of the wound, it is necessary to put a needle or the instrument used to treat the dropsy, because its shape is as before;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and when the wound is large, and you see that the fluid returns, and it is assembled after six months or more, and as it is assembled, just like before, and so will pass the patient's days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the throat.
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	You observe that in the section of this branch there is fear of more deaths, for which it seems to be worth not leaving.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and the similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say then that many abscesses come out of wounds, and similarly some congeal.
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this is by a great number of cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It means that this is caused by the superfluity of sour and bitter, which is spread to the congeals, or by percussion.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and there is no pain and it is an abscess that causes grief;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance there is an abscess that is grievous and painful, and of foul color, and at times comes from nowhere in the artery, or swells with vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is not from the artery, if it is known by the arrangement of the abscess hot, when you press it with your two fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it should not be touched at all.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is swollen from the vein is known by its arrangement at the expression of gentle pressure with the two fingers, and can be recognized well on this appearance, and on other swellings;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And so instruct the patient to strike the pulse of the wrist, then look to the top, and expose the vein behind white skin, and release the suspension from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the vein is already swollen with these new marks, then it is advisable to treat the vein and strike.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is swollen in the skin, or in that which is within the vessels, it is advisable to release all of that vein and strike round about.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the scar is behind him, so that you copy it all, and remove the wound, just as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are completed, apply the wound of flaxen cloth moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat another patient until he is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the throat.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess swollen with pus similar to that of the bubonic plague, with softening of the lymph nodes, and the patient complains greatly when it begins to open.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment of this disease is as painful as before, and we will tell you about it, according to what the ancients have done.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on the elevated seat; then lower him onto the couch suspended by the head down to your two feet, all the surrounding furniture being moved away from the side, and the linens stretched out flat.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut with the spatula, cutting deep through to the bones, until all is uncovered, and then scrape from each side, as we have said when extracting arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then prick with an needle where the artery is twice, and tie it to the first place where the vein came in, and tie it straight to the other side.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut across directly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moistures.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as you do with others or burn it with boiling water, so that no one of those comes to nourish it.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	But this does not come of anything evil, and if it comes at all, the vessels will be present, so it is best to treat all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the vessels do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and drying up, they cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	From the work of the cauterization
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The dangers of this operation are such that they come from the separation where it occurs, or the extension above the abdomen in the region of the angles, because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the vessels;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this rupture is in the separation or extension of it, and come these two kinds of movement from a multitude of causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	Out of pain from the strike, or a fall, or a burning, or the raising of a grievous weight, and by similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is a slow extension of the joint, so that it occurs little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are equal in size up to the tip, because the extension presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the cauterization that they make a sudden onset of pain at the beginning, and there are various appearances of the abscesses under the skin close to, because it comes from the intestine and the body through the cauterization.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never again take out the intestines with the ribs, and retain them in place, and make the patient suffer great pain, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron cauterizations because it is painful.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of treatment is that you instruct the patient to bring the intestine into his hand inside the wound, if it can be returned.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then take a bow on top of his neck between your hands, and lift the joints;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then bind the heart on top, and cut all the skin from the joints to the long.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then pour into the liver of the stomach, a certain number of stitches according to what you have need for to open the wound, and so that they can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scorch the skin beneath the joints, until the white skin underneath is exposed from all parts.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then pour your index finger into the space where the joint is, in the space between the skin of the joint, beneath the white skin underneath the skin of the foot, and beneath the second skin, and depart from the back of the foot, and beneath the second skin.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And then move your right hand into the space of the joints, and let the white skin be above your left hand, and lift the foot to all the skin from the waist upwards.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to stretch the head upwards, and release those who are standing behind the binding;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and take from your two fingers whether it has caught the intestine which is twisted or yellowish in color, and if you find nothing, then pour the fluid into the belly.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take an awl or a thread that has been made of three big fibers, and pour the fluid into its posterior part where it is yellowish.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the size, then cut the threads that appear in the fibers, until there are four fibers;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the yellowish fluid, which we have said is in the posterior part of the skin, with a strong bond made of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then you should wrap the joints of the fingers, and they form two parts, so that no lord who nurses them can enter your body, unless some poison comes out.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and tie it off directly according to the first joint, with two fingers of that size, and after those two joints leave space below where the kidneys are in the large body of a dog.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all that according to the circumference that the joint holds;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then strike in the part that is under the skin of the joints, where there are no scars, and the bowels, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply a moistened flannel in oil, and put it on the wounds, and tie up the joint that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at some point, it is cautered with white styptic that we have said, after the incision, by doubt of its decrement of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	This happens often, and let the ligature remain as long as it clings to him;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it does not come to the chair, then let it be soaked in hot water, and put on what we have said, until it clings.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is fully healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia in the groin
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone who dared to do the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old people said that it is made just like the nail which joins together the splinter of wood, in such a manner that you tie the cloth around, after cutting above lightly towards the lower part;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut within it, and treat the abscess that forms, until the cloth falls off;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it just as we have said, until he is fully healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	There is no occurrence of a rupture on an artery, as we have said, and it opens the veins.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not draw anything from the intestines because of the cold, and if you draw something, it's a small thing, and all these hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and if it remains too long in that place, so that he believes the wound or is constipated, until the intestines come out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens because of the extension of which is in the artery, as we have said, for it is stretched, then softened, and inflates the veins and opens them.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and never is cured with iron in this manner.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And he instructs the patient to sit up straight between his hands, then cut him loose from the bandage inflated with fluff according to the amount of three dollars;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then pull out the strap that is under the skin which adheres, and take away the raw flesh from where it adheres to the flesh.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press them to the bottom of the abdomen, then cut the two layers that are near the flesh above the raw flesh on the head of the wound, and cut both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then pull out the raw flesh from the wound, and do not cover it with anything nor extend the gauze or any other thing, as I told you in the treatment of the splinter in the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When you cut the hairs, if they sting and heal the wound, so that it becomes healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The scalp is constricted and has no appearance in the incision; the cautery is more moist in this place, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the joints.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times are softened the skin of the joints in some men, because those who are inside are softened and become like milk to see;
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary when one wants to cure him, that you make the patient sit on his back, and he strikes the softened skin on the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then gather the two lips to a suture, and if you see, cut first at three layers of the softened skin or four firmly;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then strike between the sutures, and the cure is done as with other wounds, until he is healed and the thread comes out.
dou chastrement	Letting loose from fire
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Which armor is prescribed in our law, and for this reason I prefer not to speak of it in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	And it is necessary to do this for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	because one of them is that the surgeons know how to answer when they will be asked, and also know what the cure is;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we have often had to castrate certain animals in order to help us, such as oxen and sheep and goats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that castrations are done according to two manners:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	or by atrition, or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one we do by attrition, we sit them in hot water as best as can be, until their flesh is softened and relaxed.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then take hold of them with your hand, until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the circumcision.
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is fitting that you dress yourself properly, and press the skin of each wound with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and strike above each wound one time, until you have thoroughly cleaned them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave no piece of fat exposed beneath the surface.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of circumcision is more gentle than that made by attraction, for because of the attraction it may sometimes leave something exposed under the skin, on account of which the best part desires luxury.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphroditic individuals.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Eunuchs are according to two manners of men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One is that between the two testicles opens like the figure of a woman's form, or has hair, and sometimes no urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other woman also suffers similarly, and has a lump on her finger like a nail.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of sterility and famine is that you copy the joined marks, all of them, and treat as other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, of men whose urine falls from the skin over the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tumor.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tattoos are marks joined on the natural part, as long as they are too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have it even more so than a hand, and that's the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is fitting that you tie off the surplus of the vein at your hand or on the wrist, and cut lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not cut too deeply, lest there come blood from the vein, for it will be a greater harm; then seek another remedy until you are healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and to another char that has its nose in the mouth of the mare, and on the hump, and by chance it bursts forth, and is as if one had a cow; and for this reason they call them old "cows".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must copy it, just as we have said, and the treatment until she is healed.
de erratique	Of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	It is an error if it occurs at the woman's nature is not perceived, or the cut is pointless;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and is its nature born with it, or an accident due to illness that has come upon it;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	It is done by a stick, or by the force of a subtle suction, or by an insertion made in the marrow, in the ribs, or in the bones, or wherever it is desired.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and they conceive and give birth to an infant, and by chance the flowers may bloom.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and knowledge of this is found through observation of the bile.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If it is an abortion that is close in appearance, so be it for your two or the right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is done by a subtle suction and the pulse is near two fingers, then push it back, and return to the same.
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	hold your two middle fingers together, and the woman should lie on her back, spread out her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then press the two fingers together until the subtle suction is felt, and when you see the stoppage of blood.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Now take the laine, and the mold in oil, and put it on the joint, and have the woman apply it to each person every day, so that it will heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the swelling is hard and dense, it is suitable to cut with a small spatula resembling a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the stump is in pain, when the pressure is applied and the poultice.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and apply the medicine stains, if like caecy, the stain of dragon, incense, assembled in abundance of wine.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then apply a poultice of burlap large, so that the wound will not heal.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and then let it be for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then be cured with other remedies until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marrow comes a piece of bone, if you cover it accordingly this manner, unless it is an enchantment in the abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For when there is an enchantment in the marrow, one should not touch fire.
des emorroides	from hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Bleeding wounds are outlets of veins which do not usually happen accidentally, and when bleeding wounds become old they turn into boils;
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have said in the division that similar symptoms to boils and signs exist, and I will now explain those which respond to a cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that hemorrhoids and pain in the thigh occur when they are embedded in the marrow, and if there is no sign of improvement by feeling, unless it is treated with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the mare, one can feel them, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore it is necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then tie the altar (or suppository) with fingers, and cut it at its roots, then powder on medicinal substances restraining blood, as we do, and like dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then bat her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if bleeding occurs, then she will take it (presumably a remedy), by sitting in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and gall, and with similar things; then take wheat flour, mix it with honey and ghee, and apply it on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if she stains, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If it is not so, instruct them to apply hot air on their backs and at their breasts.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take the poultice, and the pus in juice of plantain or of agrimony with wine vinegar, and apply it to the patient.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has rested, then treat the liver with application of ointment until it is healed.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles the head of an ox, so if you wish to cover it as I have said.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat him until he is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of the marshes
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come from the marshes, such as chancre and a stone-abscess, herpes, swellings, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in this division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is therefore necessary to say in this treatment the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not an abscess like those that boil with bowels;
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you want to see the work of iron, look at whether the apothems are swollen at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red then you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore do not hurry to pierce, but let the thing be maturated until the pain is relieved.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	And then place the sick person on a bed, and have two pettish beds nearby where he can lie down, and support his back and arrange his feet in such a way that they are not near the leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	And have his knees expanded, and place his arms beneath his genitals, and tie them well with a good cord.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then place the ball over the right side of his chest, and prepare the instrument with which one works on the mouth of the mare, because afterwards comes the shape.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it is fitting that when you see this instrument being applied, that you prick the skin first in order to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and so that it does not harm the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the instruments are larger, it is fitting to cover the depth of the wound with cloth, so that the instruments do not hurt.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And it is fitting to put the horn on top of the instrument, and to tighten it.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscesses open and one pulls it with the hand of thumb, if it is fitting to cover the head, the spot where the spit is made.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the bowel is empty, it is fitting that you put tanned membranes moistened in rose oil or dry green oil into the wound.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and tie the tent of the wound to the very bottom of the gash, and put over it in that place the linen strip tied tightly with moisture or boiled in water or marjoram so they are cooked.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the cure after two days of treatment comes to that, so that it may be made whole.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and never lift the gash and the wound by means of syringe of water and honey, and then with water or long-stemmed asphodels are cooked.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then returns to treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is closed up again on its own, it is advisable that you avoid using hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	First, the master is to the patient as it knows the figure of the natural birth of a child, and the signs whether they are present when you see the woman hastening after childbirth, and desiring odor.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	And so the sick person must hasten to go out;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	And thus he knows that this child-like being is according to the natural figure, and it comes out from its head, and follows with it;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, it is fitting to press his belly lightly, so that the child comes out quickly;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	because when he descends back to his head, it follows with him, and the marrow of its overflow is cleansed by good purification;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this one that comes in other ways does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	Because he sometimes comes on his feet, and comes out from the body or the shoulder, or hands, or sometimes from his belly, or somewhere else, and is transformed by chance before his neck, and through other bad figures;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	If it is necessary to the physician that she be wise and subtle in these things, and warn herself of error and deception, then I will show you all the figures on how one must help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the patient comes up to his head due to natural reasons, and a pregnant woman cries out in pain, and the child's virtues are weak, if you put her on a horse seat or hold her there;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and if the oil or fenugreek has risen from its seed, and is then boiled, and you pour the physician's medicine between his two little spatules of which it is made:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and pierce the vein, and strike at one angle until the moist ones that are inflamed are burned;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is advisable to tie up the woman with a mixture of muskillaige [musk] and fenugreek in olive oil;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	Afterwards, let it bleed and purge with condensing, and keep his mouth and nose closed for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if he is then now a child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands are sprouting forth, it is to be preferred that you gently pull them out little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot go in, place the woman on the bed, and lift up her feet.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then bend down the bed upon earth, and take hold of the woman, so she will not stumble in rising.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands cannot go in and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the knife that was placed before, and extract the child, and set them straight.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the state of the child on its feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the sick person comes to their feet, they must lower them down.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then cut a little by little, until it is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then pin it on the feet and stretch it a little at a time.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	can he jump just as quickly, if the command has to pin it, and make it take off by condensing.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if he can jump, he will live.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not like what we have said, so the tumor grows little by little, until it follows its natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	So it becomes lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	and if he cannot jump as we have, then take myrrh from aloes, oil of saments, and gum melted, and pound all in mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put on the nature of woman within and avoid this ointment, then place him in the water cold until beneath the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when it is moistened from below, they make a collar of mercury, and place it there, and let it be for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then they make him sit on the bed, then they make him vomit and hold his mouth and nose, and let him take gentle air to his belly, because now he is able to breathe.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of a child's joint from its place
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the patient comes in this form, they put on the poultice a little bit at a time;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then they put on the bandage above his neck, and hang down his feet, and let him lie on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and let him bend his hands little by little, and then let them press the hands above the belly, and strip off the padding below, until it is prepared for the opening.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the fever does not fall, take his feet and let them be moved, then move his legs up towards the chest, then pour your hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	And give the child some water sometimes.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	Instruct the woman to pray as much as the fever lasts.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of a child that is born with one arm twisted outward
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is proper to endeavor to restore the hand.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If it cannot be restored, have the woman get up and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, have her lie on the bed and straighten up her legs;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then apply the medicine which I have told you.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she becomes pregnant, so that she sits on a stool, then study how to bring it back into place with her hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and she brings the child according to its natural shape, and she brings it forth, and he commands her to bind herself until the fever passes.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the child on its neck, and has spread out its arms, and turned its face towards its back its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that he holds his hand, then turns it little by little, and she will bear it lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, he applies the natural musk and oil of aloes, as we have said, then he commands her to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, so that she sits on the stool, and he commands her to bind herself;
et la fai esternuer.	And let them burst open.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of the same manner as it was to all that.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this manner in all the lines, so strike the line at its joint, until the moistures are empty.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the fever boils on its face and on its neck, so strike at the root, lest it be retained, and die the child.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then bathe the child inside, until you have put it in such condition as is fitting, and command the woman to restrain herself on no occasion.
adonques si istra legierement.	and so if they are light,
de l’issue des gemelz	From the birth of twins.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	So that sometimes they give birth to many times, and sometimes only three or four.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	And this is not an unusual thing, and it has happened often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are strange things, and they do not live if they occur.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know this one, which they multiply, and are increased by the same faculty that devises it, which is linked to the blood.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And no time occur in such a natural way as all of us have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they occur severely, then the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle remedies be applied quickly, and clearly, what she does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And do it in such a way that it is as if it were worth more than the price of medicine.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	No time are formed in the neck or shoulder I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, or more so up to XV, and they are all shaped like an infant by the measure of their father’s glorious size, for the physician knows that such a thing will happen because it often appears.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if it happens according to what is required.
de l’enfant mort	of dead children
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you cure the woman after a dead child or birth, as I said in the division, and it does not come to pass, and you are constrained by the work of hands.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is required that you know whether the woman has a healthy nature and does not have an accident or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is required that the woman should lie on her back, and bring her shoulders down, and be inclined to the chest, and lift up her legs.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and let the minister apply the poultice of two parts, whether tied to the bed or treated as soon as the child is born;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the mare with moist oils of mullein and fenugreek and sesame seeds, then apply the oil to her hands.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then pour the mare with oil lightly, then let her eat or drink whatever she desires that is convenient for her, and take care if there are signs of illness on her chest so that it appears upon her head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if the sores are in her eyes or on her neck or in her mouth or under her chin or near her beard or in the navel or over the ribs, and if there is discharge from them onto the feet, then apply or prick them with needles and cauterize.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is fitting that you should tie the bowstring on your right hand and put the arrow between your two fingers of the left hand, and strike with all your right hand lightly, and knock the arrow into any one of those places that we have said, until it comes to an empty place;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the bowstring:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	and then strike against another bowstring, or where you have need of it, so that the extraction is even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch it equally by moving from one side and the other, so that it may open, and so that the bowstrings are tightly fixed, as is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if it remains a part of it, so that the bile is gathered on some of its fingers with oil, and strike them in that part, and treat the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If they do not stay in place, then put this needle or more up high where it can be felt, and do whatever you must until all the fire has been put out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other and it cannot be straightened by straining, you should wrap around that drapery so that all its blood has been let out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then cut into the joint of the foot or on the knee, and thus you should do it with the other hand, and two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the head of the child is swollen and it has stitches in its issue, or if it has a painful head, thus you should pour the thorned sponge between your two hands, and make the head and extract the pain.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	In order to find out what has been lost with this instrument called “almidach”, since the form comes with the instruments or scalpel that is after it;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and then perform the same procedure for those who have great natural strength;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then treat the bones with tongs, and hold them tightly at the joint, if they are splintered, until the moisture that is in or on them dries out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot be extracted, cut it into small pieces at the joint that you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it has an abscess in the belly or outside the ribs, so that you may puncture until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the fever is on his feet, so that there is a light attraction and an address to the mouth of the arrow is lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is in the belly or near the navel, so that you may extract it at the wrapped strip over the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And let the belly swell or the stomach, until the moisture which is there dries out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if another bone is broken, and the head remains, then pour the bile into his hand from the mouth of the mare.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then pour one or two ounces, and treat him.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the mare is contracted by hot pus that has come out, so it is not necessary to struggle with it, but rather administer soothing and cooling things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and let him administer plaster, and cut it in soft water and milk.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its chest, and you can put him level, then administer what we have said to a living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if they have no power, so let them be treated with pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if they take the things we said to be cut out from the arrowhead that comes into the marrow.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if they start bleeding again, then let it be put in water and restrained, and let them take other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman with child who had a child that had died in her womb, and she took another of the dead one instead.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there came an abscess in the throat, and it swelled so much that it burst open, and great pain ensued.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was unable to translate this as I do not know what it is.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put under the plaster of strong attraction, and from it came a bone, and after some other days some others.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised greatly, because that womb has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	If the wound is found, and touched with bones, until the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman remained long and thus, and it seemed after a few days that there was a small amount of blood on her.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not recorded this chapter except because when the masters found an unusual thing, they would seek advice.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	Bring back to their place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	After the fire cautery, comes the form of pressing, to which one applies books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and in both shoulders and two joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	All things, the horns should be more subtle in restriction, and made of white or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the fist should be twice as wide as long, and one palm and a half long beside the edge of the trees.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in both joints should be two like this same fist, which are firm in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two fastenings are tied in the mouth of the mortar to open when you turn both horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, with a similar shape but more subtle and lighter, is made from a beam of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the nails;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and has two heads and two attachments, just like the palm of a thumb, and two are twice as wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	And when you see opening the wound to all the instrument, have a woman sit with a lit ( possibly a cloth or gauze) over the pieces and the legs exposed, then tie the two attachments together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between its jaws;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then cover your hand over the entire instrument, just like you did with the nails equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the wound, so much that the blood will make its way;
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all pointed, and they have many similar forms;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when the knives are made sharper, so is their power, and they cut through thicker skin.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not properly prepare the instrument before using it, because its need is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second tooth is retained in the child, it is wise to instruct the patient to keep their lower jaw closed, and then pull out the tooth with tweezers, and hold their hands to the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if it falls, well is that.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If that does not work, take out the root, and make a puncture or wound, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as camphor, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs or some of them shall be cooked or boiled in water on fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then put a chain or cord in the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the marrow, and hold it tight until the vapors come out from the marrow.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then pull out the flesh, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If his shoulder falls off immediately.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this cure, and is not better, instruct the baron to make her moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in muskillage of altai, and then pour it into nature, and desire a second application.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, so grasp and extend it little by little straight, so that the marrow does not seize at the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but you must move more lightly to the right and left, and then treat;
si venra et se desaerdra.	if he comes and falls back.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the arrow is tightly closed, we have said the treatment for vomiting, and fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is nothing of what we have said, be careful that you do not become foolish while treating;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is said that what is in the mouth of the arrow should be bound to the woman's plexus, and then wrapped with ointment tetrafarmaçon;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if the poultice will bring it back, and come forward;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	But it happens, when she does so, bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and the patient is ill.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Then it is necessary therefore to give them foul-smelling fumigation to that:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the ancients have ever used fumigation with cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument at which you should fumigate the woman is, in retaining the flowers and the second joint if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to be seen like a snake, and put the head subtle in nature, and the shoulders wide on the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigation be on the embers, and the lice until it is exhausted, and then another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Most children are born without having any underlying foundation, for the child is nourished by subtle suckling.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it is true then let him go to the bath where he will perceive that which is good for him, and do not feel his pulse again by the stethoscope or gentle touch, and fasten the bandage so that it does not touch.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put on a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of poultice until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will stop bleeding, then place a poultice of onions in the wound and let hands lie still, and leave it until the fever departs.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes comes a sudden bleeding from a wound or an abscess.
si covient coper celui soudement:	If it is true then cover that sudden bleeding:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	If it is cured, as we have said of the cauterization.
de la fistule dou fondement	of a fistula in the fundament.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fissures that come from under the foundation are nodules, and when they come from the ground before or in the space of two parts, if there is a fistula or more.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that node is old, it must be treated in such a way, with moisture awakened and causing blisters or subtle boils, and there is no time when these fistulas pass.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and are produced because of the thing that comes out or ventilation when the patient makes an evacuation, and by chance one falls on them.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if the fistulas occur just above the bladder, and just above half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach just above the joint of the thigh, and just outside of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus it is known that the fistula persists in the fundament, and does not persist.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and you put your thumb into the fundament, and insert a subtle needle of linen or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has tortuosity, put in place a subtle tent or a horse's hair until you feel the tent or the hair to your will;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you don't feel it, and no pain or discomfort comes from the wound or the tortuosity, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	since it does not pierce.
si te haste dou curer.	so that you hurry to the cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is cut across to the bladder or just across the conduit of the urine, then it comes out and cannot be closed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is felt at the joint of the elbow, then the tent comes to the left.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	but if it does not have tortuosity and the location of the pain is on its own, then it is a bowing inward, and no medicine or immediate treatment by applying poultices;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these painful ulcers there is no cure except for hard work and useless endeavors of foolish people who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	For one that is not painful and is not old, there is hope for recovery by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient will rest between your hands on their back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he lifts the legs up to his groin, and bends his knees to his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then he pours a poultice of dung or of wool if it has tortuosity, until you know whether the poultice comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels pain at the bottom, then it is fitting that you pour your two index poultices there, since then if the poultice has affected him.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And so if it is discovered or you sense between your thumb and fingers, then know that they are swollen;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If it is not strained very much, then it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	But some people can be healed by this treatment, but few are actually saved;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the one that is healed, if it happens to be cauterized with a subtle fire according to the width of the fistula, as was said;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and it boils all over in the fistula until it comes from the bottom.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and perform this twice or three times until you know that these swellings must be burned, which are like a feather of an owl;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the doctor of tentacles moist in butter, until that flesh be firm, then the doctor of ointment puts on and stitches.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus hurt, this is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	But if this, in another way cannot be cured;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if they put pressure between, and do not pierce at just the right spot where it is founded, and there is a covering of thick flesh or fat between the two places, and you see the fistula at that place which has a soft covering.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and drain afterwards before the dressing, and then apply cautery until it comes to the head of the fistula;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the wound will be delivered, and it will heal.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	The hairs that are cut back too much look like the quills of an owl, and they do not remain the same.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if he does not want to be healed, and you cut between you and the wound, then the cautery of fire or medicine will be applied.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery, there are two bone things.
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	which is to say, the irritation of those hairs that are stuck together, and the drying out of blood and the shrinkage due to moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	and then the treatment for wet or moist swabs in butter or in a cold box, until they dry out and the hairs become arched.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	and then treat the wound with ointments that are quickly dried up with cold and harsh remedies, and dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When he is restored, if it is healed and does not come back again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess comes just as deep into the bone and is distant from the body, pour in two or the depth of the bone, and ask about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the wound and it is between two things, whether it be linen or a suture or hairs, or if it is close to being perforated, if there are only fires visible for sight and hope, by the care of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	If you burn it so as we have said, or if you cut into its root, or if you can pierce it and treat it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not pierce too deeply lest you strike the root that holds the foundation, and comes out by chance in the opposite direction.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	in case it heals, then remove that covering and the mud as soon as it is cut from the root, or by probing or with another instrument pointed.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then find out what free thing is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the back part of the root.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes fistulas occur in this way:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and when you pour the tent into the fistula, and it is stuck at the bottom of the skin above, you take a tent made like this.
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put the twisted thread in two, and put the tentacle all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is stuck on the edge of the bottom within, then extract the thread from that puncture, so that you pour your solution onto the edge.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and pull out the head of the thread, and set together the two shoulders, and bind one to the other, and let it rest for a day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and bind it tightly at any time, until the threads come out of between the two bones and get loose.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Now cure the wound until it is closed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, then pierce it in all ways that you can, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not advisable to tie up the wound if it is too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spur in a nail, from which a fistula is made, is very rough and sharp.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand not, because of that one should not cut what one does not need to cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Herbs are according to two kinds:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	or they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and when there are small and great ones, and in the wound cut on the side, and when there is one or more of them, and it avoids the fundament and at the head of the fundament.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those which avoid have little moisture, and are cut on the side with a little water of citron or a little blood, and they have the color of flesh.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have gone inside the foundation, so if you instruct the patient to expect relief in rooms, until the foundations are solid, and they see them coming out.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hasten, and the knife has grasping fingers, or hold it with your finger, then cut in its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the roots cannot be held by its moisture, then they take it to the brazier, or to linen, or from a piece of camel hair;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract them with your two hands, then cut them, and powder above some hot powders that are in place of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize as is said in the book of cautery, because the treatments of other treatments until he is made whole;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the bone cannot be drawn out, then bind the patient with a binding that bites and scratches in order to cleanse what is at its foundation, so it can come out openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	and to the patients, and if the roots are heavy on their foundation, there is a lighter treatment;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and that you prick them with your nail or tongs, and cut, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and so fear the cutting with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	if it is fitting to dress the wound in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	take a thread, and put it through, and then pull the thread up over and pierce the other side of the needle, and turn the two threads in the opposite direction under the needle, and if so, make them thick.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And hold fast the wound, then do not hold it, and pull out the arrow, and so do all the others, and leave it for a while to correct the overflow of blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then put the wet cloth of linen on melted fat or in rose oil, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let him rest until he has evacuated, and when he is healed, as long as the remedies of binding and other cures are done.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	cut very tightly around the veins or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	It happens frequently that blood clots suddenly in the intestine, and by the force of nature, when the disease is old and medical treatment is worthless.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is convenient to reset the wound at the tip of a spatula or at one's nail, where it does not allow moisture.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then treat him so that he is healed, if necessary.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot heal, then resume scraping more strongly than before, until he heals completely, and is scorched.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the healer as long as he is healed.
dou fremit	a fist
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A formice is a small warts-like appearance on the body, and it will grow into a more significant one.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes the truth is, and it's felt just like death of coldness, and comes to all the body, and more in the hands than in other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the healer says that you should take a thorn of an swan's feather, or a strong goose feather, and put that thorn on the coldness, until the purple circles appear all around.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to the entire chain until you can feel it all vibrating together, and bring it out by its roots, and cut through the roots of the vibration.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see this, do it with a candle of straw or iron according to that shape, and be subtle under and careful above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not pierce, because it will hold in two, and you must press.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see it, then cauterize the vibration, just as it is in front of or behind the cautery of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form like a bladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never is done a clistering of silver or bow, or molten lead or patch.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and never is done these small and large instruments, according to the size that they are brought.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These then one uses in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small or large syringe depending on whether it is above or below in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and if there is a deviation or the belly is tied, as you see, and the joint is perceived to be inside.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	And has a fracture on one side, and in the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And if he is a man who puts medicine from the stomach of an animal or parchment in his belly, and it is perceived to be around with small fractures, then each fracture must have one unit of space, and pour into these fractures a strong thread that is twisted in X or in some place, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, if he holds it in front of an instrument with a strong thread, then seal.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is like the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And if the medicine is neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with the seal of oil or a mixture of olive and lard or something similar, then pour it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the minister greets him with both hands together, until he is entirely well; then extract the splinter, and raise the patient’s legs to show them off, and if the medicine comes out as it can.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a whole night, then it is even greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you plasterize him in a disease of descending belly, and the medicine is hastened to come out, then he will resume it as long as he is sane.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorroids are in the fundament, or an abscess, then the splinter is also as subtle as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and that's the shape of the very subtle splinter where the skin is tightly stretched:
des plaies	Injuries
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have previously discussed the cure for wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or you will say the cures of hands and medicine, according to its completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that injuries are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places or locations where they are inflicted, and why they are inflicted.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	Things that are caused by piercing with a stone, or the cutting of a sword and knife, or an arrow or a club, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	according to the laws of the body, if a wound occurs on the neck, or head, or arm, or belly, or liver, and similar members.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and will begin with simple wounds of the head, because the memory of this chapter will come up.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, be careful because it may be due to piercing with a stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt whether an abscess has formed.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	If you do it soon, the healing of the head itself is what matters first, if it comes from bleeding of the wound, and if they are healed on the opposite side of the navel.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and lest the patient be given a lot of wine and fat meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not heal, if his meat is made thinner and he drinks no wine, neither eats any flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and puts on the wound, if an abscess comes in, cotton soaked in oil rosined alone, or in vinegar suppository.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess, puts on the wound, if it is fresh and all its bleeding has stopped, and if it is not moved by air, powder, I will say so later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the humors have moved, so put on some bandages, until he is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then they are sewn together, as I will say of wounds of the belly, from the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to bone, and flesh, and only holds together by a thin skin, it will not heal.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medicine, and restore the thickness of skin in its place with leather-like tissue, and instruct the patient to eat great quantities of meat, just like eggs and cooked bread, as well as chickens and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rotting skin and it clings to bone, cut off the entire rot and take out the pus, then treat him.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein that will not close without surgical intervention, and cannot be stopped with medicine alone, then choose whether to tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, fix it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	If they do not profit from this cautery, then the fire.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then it is a light cure.
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and put this powder on which also softens the flesh as it has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the way to make the powder if
pren encens une partie;	take frankincense a part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	burnt dragon two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	salt of live three parts, and the subtle powder, and apply the wound, and bind it tightly, until it is well closed and united to all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it well, and let it go slowly if it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the medicine will not remain with a person when they are healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes only calcined vivarium is used when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the wound has been made to heal.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arrow has caused the wound to heal, especially when it was in that place, do not put on this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some digestive ointments or poultices made of flour of rye mixed with water and honey until it turns brown.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the other patient until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone break comes with the wound and it is small, then pull it out gently.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about breaks of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, but there is no difference between the two of them regarding the head, but if the nerve on the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the neck, do not put any other medicine or restraint, for night causes swelling and makes them retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not put anything on the wound, because the flesh of the nail is cold, and the continuation of a boil is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but if the medicine is needed, then like chalz is washed in warm water, and mixed with rose oil, and the powder of the same medicine is also washed in warm water, and other minerals are applied accordingly, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, tie with bandages first, then apply treatment until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and he is in pain and full of pus, cut deeper.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the arteries are cut and there is an escape of blood, then apply the cauterization, and the salve, and the ointment.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If the spine of the throat is pierced or the nerves, and the vein is kept, because the flesh will go, cut the skin above the canal of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then tie the wound tightly and let it remain for some days, then apply ointments to make it healthy.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has caused impression in the bone, so that.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, since the flesh is totally removed, and what you cannot have, so let it remain until the wound has puffed up, and the blood comes out, and sets free the issue.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, so powder on the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is an abscess, so too as I have said in his chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of arrow or sword wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a blow from a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, then look at the direction of the wound so that you can see.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Therefore know that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, then do not put powder in it or bind it at first, nor let it bleed more than what comes out by natural means, turn back to the heart, and take care of the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	But put a pleasant dressing on it, and bind it two times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	And if you do not have dressing, put some cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	If there is no spasm or trembling of bad thoughts, he should not strain his mind.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the bone in its proper position, if you know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cure him with ointments and other treatments, until he is cured.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if she cannot be healed and opened, then you should know that there is an abscess.
si la cure si com on doit.	if it is done as it must be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	and if the wound is from a cut of sword or knife and it is simple, on top, or on the back, you should cure the one in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	but if it is large, of suturing;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	And if it is small, of powder, and she has pierced pieces into the bone, and so chosen the wound, and the flesh is burned when they are severed;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if there are no wounds that have been severed, then let the wound fester, for it will ease the extraction;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And other wounds with different limbs are treated in the same way as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	A falling or bursting of the stomach.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The bursting of the stomach is great and painful, and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From the large wound there is no time for the intestine to be released or the nerves of the intestines, because of the intestinal insertion.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the stitches are more painful, and no time is worth even a small wound compared to a large one, because that's why you put in more pins to keep the intestines back inside, if you don't put them back up again.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestines swell so quickly that they feel pain, and return later, therefore it is to be feared for those with the inner wound, because for this reason one must move the entrails back to their place which others have done.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And it is known that there are four kinds of rupture in the belly:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the two common folds occur in the belly fold, and the other three specific folds of other body wounds are also common to all those wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and they are all more specific to the belly fold, and I will say each one and declare them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I said that when the wound is small and there is no intestine injured, and it's a matter of putting something back, this is one of the two kinds:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Out of consideration for the injury, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the hurt.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	and when it is cold, heat it in that manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	moisten it with an sponge or the size of a cloth soaked in cold water, or you cook it in boiling water and vinegar and spices, and keep the intestine warm until the swelling is gone.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and at no time do this vinegar-staining, and apply it when the swelling is gone.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	and when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or boil and salt are cooked, because by this it cleans out easily.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, they make a small wound to the instrument with which one strikes the hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	And the first treatment is castration that equals its size, so we should not cut it unless there is great necessity and no other option.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the stricture to be broken;
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it tears inside the cavity and does not come out, and then you see the form;
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, so you put it back again according to its natural form in its own place, if you have the power, for this is useful.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on his back and lift his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should lift the head and the belly higher than the other parts, and so when the wound is on one of the two sides, put your finger into that place so that the navel is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and so it is necessary to treat what I say about large wounds and medium-sized ones.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	Treat small wounds with what is applied to you; then take both hands and have the merciful minister who shows all the necessary tools in his hand, and assemble the lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common way of suturing wounds, and it is that you prick an awl or more arrows, according to the quantity of the width of the wound; then let off a little from the head of the wound two fingers' breadth, and put in an awl with good strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and prick the two nails of the leather with the two nails of the siphon, which is inside the leather, until you make it pierced from that part, and assemble the two heads of the siphon four times.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	First instruct the patient to insert the thread into the double strand of the needle, then assemble the two pieces of the wound immediately, and finally leave two fingers' space, and then pierce another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then the thread is tied like you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing so according to what is needed of the needles until the whole wound is restrained.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be in proportion, between subtle and coarse, for fine needles cut through all the flesh, and large ones cannot penetrate very well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for that is why they should be in proportion.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not advisable to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they cut through and destroy the wound before healing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	And then cut the hairs around the needles so that they do not cause the patient to fall asleep, and tie them with strings or cloths around the hairs of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	And this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it involves one needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second sewing method is common, and it is that you join two pieces of leather together with two pieces of silk in assembly on one needle or where there is only one strong thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have joined these two together completely, then the needle retracts at the place where you started it, in the manner of sewing clothes.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	And put space between each fold of skin the size of a small finger;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This fold in the abdomen seven times at home, and I sewed up an injury that one man had in his belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than half a palm in size, and intestines were protruding well beyond two palms in size, and the wound was located in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I let the intestine go then it was twenty-four hours later and the wound had healed for fifteen days, and the cure, and I was sane.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And if they had hoped that he would die, it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not cure him with medicine, for I was in a place where there was no one to be found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And put more ointment on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	I can’t help with that.
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and the thread from the back where it was sewn inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	How many times the needle has pierced the vein straight through straight, whether it pierced in the head or on the cost, or put the needle inside and made another hole from the back where it was sewn inside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And if the sewing is done in this manner, that you sew as the barber sews his beard, and that you leave once on one side, and cover with another, until the entire sewing is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second manner of sewing, which the Galenists call properly, is such that they assemble both parts in one piece naturally, and apply one end of the vein to another end, in this way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Make a needle or head of a pin close to the mark near; and pierce it only there, and let the two joints at the shoulder.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle and pierce it from the side opposite to where it was previously inside, at both joints of the shoulder.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce one and the other from the side opposite to where it was previously inside, at both other joints near the mark on the other side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the most common way of sewing and dressing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	They say it is so from this phrase, and no one witnesses it, therefore we should sew the belly with two needles, or if there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one must poke one end of a needle from this side, and the other end from that side, in the manner of those who sew wounds.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And it knows that when the laceration is in the belly, the stitches cause more pain than those on other parts of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is like that of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and that when you find the fresh wound has all its sinew and blood drawn out, so that the arrow has moved it, then fix again the intestine, and the wound.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	Then puts on the powder mixed with charcoal, and if the arrow has moved it, then puts on any dressing that is present, until the wound closes.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and they cut the thread, and they sew the belly, and the medicine.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as other wounds until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you do not have medicine, put on it as soon as it is recognized, cotton wool and then move it twice a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	Because you do not need any other medicine in addition to these dispositions for simple wounds;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound will cause commonality among the principal members, it is fitting to put a lighter linen in oil of tarre hot, or in rose oil, and place it on the abscesses, and below the swellings;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and this happens many times, since it is caused by wine vinegar, just like that putrefaction comes to his intestine.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and he cuts within, and learns that when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is rotten, and this is because of the plant matter that is in it, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to its natural state.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the wound is eaten away from the place, he places it behind, just as with the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and has turned towards blackness or brown, then it is better to remove the one that is black, because there blood and veins will not come from it, for there are veins.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut that which is between the ligament, and hang both the two heads down from below the wound until the extraction comes out with the vomiting of the bowels.
de la routure dou boueil	of the burn from a blow
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, because I saw that one man was wounded or pierced by a spear in his abdomen.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it was the wound on his right side of the stomach, and became infected and developed a fistula, and from this occurred the evacuation and vomiting.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it according to what I knew, and did not stop subtlety until he was healed, and the pus disappeared.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it heal, I doubted that the patient had an evil in his stomach.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	but he did not have any illness, but instead improved in his condition and ate and drank.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they say to certain experimenters that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he must be bound in this way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	Take the bowstring around large testicles, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the bowstring has passed over the mouth, put it on both lips, so that it constricts his mouth.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then strike the head, and it will stay in place so that he cannot dislodge it, then take another bowstring after, in this same way as before, until the wound is completely closed.
et cout la plaie.	and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	Those who have a knot in the intestine, and no trouble to the patient, and can tie the intestine with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the head of this string from the intestine as much shaved down as possible, and then tie to the head of this thread thin string, then insert the thread into the needle, and cut the intestine, and pull it back in the wound.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this manner of sewing on foreign flesh is only used according to the way of faith and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the narrow intestine channels, there is no remedy except subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Any wound or abscess that becomes inflamed with age is called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and has a discharge.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the vertebrae nodulation free of hardness and whiteness, or no pain is felt, and it is also like the beak of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes a clear bowstring, and other times a thick one;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and at other times enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed and does not have a cure, is only due to one of the seven causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, by the smallness of the wound or body.
ou por sa malice;	or due to its malevolence;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because it has a hard and stubborn quality inside, and on the lips, which does not allow healing to take place;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or if there is too much bowstring.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	The limbs are poor, and the material is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	For the medicine is not good in the treatment.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	because it is a sign of plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	because the property in this region is late for digestion and late for health, and fleeing by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones;
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have shown all these causes and signs and cures for medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I inform you of the treatment for fistula which is done by operation of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	which has a fistula in every member of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	because there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the sac, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if to those who come to take possession of the principal member, and as if they were.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the ulcers in this manner are due to bad health, and there is only labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is no ulcer that does not arise in the place I have told you to look, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it manifesting, then take a thread of arrow or iron, whether the ulcer is straight or curved;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the ulcer is twisted, then search for a subtle thread to push it back, because the threads bend in following its twisting.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the ulcer has broken skin and you cannot well search for it with threads, then close one of the breaks, because moisture is more easily closed on another break, and cleansed;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then let the patient feel the pain in their power, so you know if there is bone or nerve, and it's stuck fast, and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when you press on your hand, and what place it is;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you know truly where it is, and if it's near a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or any of the places I have told you about, if you cut according to what I have told you, and remove the foul flesh and corrupted bones that are inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the cure until it is well, and if the fistula is deeply set in right direction, so that it must be cut deep to remove, as long as you can, then put wet tourniquets in medicine ague, and pour them into the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the remaining superfluous matter at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put ointments on clean wounds, so they become healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healing with these, then cautery as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by an ulcer, kill it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	But if a vein or nerve does not grieve or affect the principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackening, then remove the corrupted part as much as possible, and cure with ointments on clean wounds until it becomes healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healing, and the wound festers as before, know that you are not going to cure it unless you start anew from the beginning.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If you uncover and desire it as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore him.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if he is in such a state, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If this is not the case, know that the corruption has gone too far, you cannot expect anything from it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other solution than to resort to the art of nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small, corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tongs, if the strain is on a convenient instrument for this, and if there are many bones, take all of them, don't leave any one.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture makes it worse, and there is no error or fear, cut and dry, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	If you do not remove them within an hour, put the wound under a cloth and apply ointment to prevent rot, and let it sit there until the pus sets in between the bones, and then they will have less difficulty with the bones.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it's a large bone, such as the thigh or knee, remove only the rotting flesh until the blackening is complete on the bone, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a great part of the corruption, and it comes to form a mole on the bone.
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is suitable and covering all the corrupted area, then let the patient be covered until he has become sound.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in the patient's leg, so that you may take an example and assist me with your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	It was a young man within XXX years, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, until the materials arrived at the leg, and he fled from a large abscess, and had no other reason for not opening it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the mirror by their folly opened so much that the abscesses opened, and they flowed out a lot of material, and it became a fistula, and many of them got infected with pus and moisture of the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many mired his cure within II years, and there was no remedy in the art of hands, until I was summoned, and I came to see his leg and the medicines that were used to treat him, and what was flowing from the infected wounds had great harm to the body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And so he became red the body of the youth, and had the color citrine.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I applied a tent in one of the abscesses, and then I searched for all the abscesses, and found that some were meeting at other parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I failed then, and cut into one of the wounds so that I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and rotten, and there was corruption inside the bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw that which appeared to be the corrupted bone, and thought there could be no other corruption except what I had taken.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to restore the wound with medicinal salves for a long time and could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then resumed, and discovered the bone in its original state, and found the corruption continuing inside the bone, and I saw it, and then I removed it, and thought of healing it.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But I could not cut through to an inch of bone, and the treatment was very painful, then I restored him with medicine.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and he became healthy and whole quickly, and it did not require further work except for the weakness of the patient, who could no longer endure, and because I feared his death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often takes place, but it brings no harm and the person recovers entirely, and in their place an iron-hard cartilage forms, and they are of good disposition and have no harm or ill effect whatever, neither at rest nor when coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, and he wishes to be treated in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take the ligature, and strain the tendon at the head of the bone which is open, and command that it be stretched upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and take another ligature of a thicker rope than the first one, and tie it above the skin which covers the exposed bone, and pull the skin tight until you treat the infected flesh downwards, and uncover the clean flesh as far as you see, lest the wound infects the skin.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And place a stick or a table under the bone to cover up the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to sew as soon as you can see and feel the corruption, and sew again afterwards.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and will not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the flesh completely.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then put a stick under it, and then sew the one part to the other the corruption, sewing above the lower part of the corruption, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in a joint, then cut out the corrupted joint and sew the bone where it contains on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if corruption is in the continuation of both joints, so there's no other sign but a boil.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if corruption is at the nail of the hand, or at the nail of the foot, so that thing is very strong, but you must always inquire how that corruption came to be.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and purify it in all the ways you can, but make sure that neither venom nor nerves cause harm.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the incisors and hair are many, depending on the setting of the bones and the appearance of them, their thickness and subtlety, and their size and fragility, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and so it is necessary to prepare each type of bone according to their likeness, its instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And it will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if it is necessary that you have the instrument according to what it should be.
dou feu	Out of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The joints will dislocate either because of being inside, or because of not being there;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have medicine to cure the corruption by the treatment of medicines, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cover that member up to its joint or where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes death or by malice, which is greater, from the defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and if the signs are that the limbs become black, as if they have been burned by fire, and after that blackness, it spreads to another member, and takes over all the body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you touch the fire cautery, and if it is by striking of certain venomous beasts, such as scorpions from the sea and lizards and similar things, so that the corruption is in the head to two, then strike again, and do not give him space until it comes before his hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes to the hand, if you strike on the joint, so that the corruption does not come before the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, if you strike on the elbow;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there are no other remedies than those that depend on its power;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do so in the same way whenever the corruption comes to a bone;
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it comes to the first joint, then apply it after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to a bone, then cut through all the bone.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it goes up in the leg, then cut at the joint of the knee.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other treatment but to kill the patient.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the way of cutting or dressing the limb if it is such that you bind above and below, and tie one stretcher to the lower end and another to the upper end, then serve the cloth that is between the two stretchers at a distance of one span wide, until the bone is visible.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	the needle or thread, and tie each of these parts with linen, so that the needle does not touch the healthy part, and comes to the patient another wound and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	and if bleeding occurs while you are working, then immediately cauterize the wound with haste, or apply certain powders to restrain it;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a strong cord, and care for it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you how it happened to me in that house of stone:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	there was a black spot that seemed to be burning with fire, and this burn came first on his two toes, until it consumed the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the bones see the corruption, so he covers the foot, and is made well.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And long time after the corruption returned, two fingers of the hand were affected, and he came to me, and I put above those affected areas counteractive things after cleansing the body, and could not stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he said that I should cut off the hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of repelling the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and also I doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would not die, because the virtues of the body are weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he despaired completely, and returned to his own land, and he covered his hand with earth, and was made well.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have heard this tale of fire cautery only because of another treatment, if it is needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	But sometimes an abscess comes up on the skull, and it remains so for a long time that it causes great swelling of the forehead.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then it bursts and perforates, and the bone is shot out, just like our vessels.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And the skin that covers it is just as subtle as a dried thread, and does not run against the bone or the nerve; and such disease is called 'healthy', and is not called a fistula.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so long that it reaches the bone all the way through, then it is called a fistula.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And the treatment is such that you strike that skin all over, and meanwhile as it is subtle, just like we have wrapped.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not heal because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have assumed that the skin heals, and the corruption is not in its entirety, and the skin is thick from fat, then apply a poultice like this:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	examine the size of the breasts and the bowels that are in them from a foul odor, then apply a poultice made with Egyptian medicine as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take equal amounts of aloes and oil, and put them to be cooked in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take what is needed according to your necessity, and make it in water and in honey, and bind up the breast, and strap the wound.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine remain on for two hours, then pull it out by pressing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the breast is well defined, and draw out the pus.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and at no time do bind with hot water of ashes, when this medicine is not available; and take ash from the fust of grapevine, and pour on warm water over it, then let it run, and bind up, until you know that the breast is well healed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot bear it, or does not have any relief from Egyptian medicine or hot water of ashes, bind up with water and honey when they start to break out in small boils.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	You clean it with honey and wine made sweet, so that the honey has property to purify and cleanse, and the wine is boiled until it becomes healthy.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And when you have done this and believe that the breasts are well purified, if the cleanser made from it (the honey) produces pus inside it, and you prick at it with forceps, and make a puncture with oil rose and in wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or you clean it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have previously mentioned the properties or treatment of the ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the rupture of the breast is small, and the canker from the cleanser cannot enter, then enlarge with a needle by one puncture, and apply a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too large, so that the cut and its closure can only be done at a joint where it can enter, and if there is a fracture with the bow (above) exposed, then the patient must lie on one side as much as possible.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	But when the bone is in full depth, do not let it be left untouched.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the shoulder area underneath so as to see it properly, do shape it in such a way that the bone is brought down to its lowest point, for when the bone is deep, do not let it be left untouched and if you cannot cover the shoulder area underneath so as to see it properly, shape it in such a manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so that the bone moves slightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bone.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	And take conserving medicines to put on the healthy one, and stand over the linen drapery that covers the whole body.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then bind the wound with a bandage that is not too tight or too loose, but rather according to its size; and place it on the healthy one to alleviate the pain, and do not put on the thick bandage of fire until after many days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and the one who has on the wound in the breast will often take out the bowels, and knows whether it is venom or blood or if it is undigested or un digested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take precautions if the patient feels pain or numbness, and if there is an abscess or not, and when you see how your medicine has spread in that manner, then observe whether the wound heals quickly, and approach the healing.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then put it away at morning or the third day, and when you put in a new bandage, change another and renew the tie.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts are swollen with indigestion after many days, he knows that the breasts do not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle veins are cut after a long time, do not despair of your health, for good health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For it is known that there are men who have been late in applying heat to their wounds, and those who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if a bowled-up indigestion swells up near the breast after many days, knows that the breasts will not heal.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breasts are slow to absorb and are far from healing, add dry medicines mixed with moist ones in equal virtue, since the bandage is tight, for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the rear medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	tie the bandage tightly and make it with rose oil mixed with equal virtue of olive oil and vinegar.
puis le confit et en use;	After the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And this same treatment makes the flesh grow thicker, when no injuries are present, or you take a mirror and oil and incense, and grind it, and make powder on the honey while it is over the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And then in the glue I wrap, and stretch it over the breast, and sometimes an ointment of gold is administered, and roots of the celestial lily, which is as fine as flour.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	And using simple or compound remedies:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Grind them up and make a powder, and put it on the honey that I told you about, and use.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the treatment is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you know that corruption has entered deeply into the bone, or it presses on the joints, or makes the limbs hard.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of the fistula is such as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the foot
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that forms under the fingernail, or under the toe, or sometimes in other parts.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is old and not tended to, so that it comes to an abscess of the flesh, and swells and becomes infected, they cut away and clean the wound as long as they can reach the root of the nail, and sometimes they even cut all the way through.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and the corruption comes just to the bone, so that it brings great pain and a foul smell, and the flesh of both feet is swollen, and its color is flushed.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it in the manner we have said in division, and the treatment does not benefit him, so it is necessary that you apply to him a piece of iron to all the remaining surplus of the foot, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is much great aid if the bones are healthy, and the joint is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the joint presses against the cartilage, and begins to pierce it, and swell, so as to apply a cloth under the joint that covers the cartilage, and bandage high up, then carefully strike that subtle and gentle blow, and put on the remaining of the cartilage medicines sharp and corrosive to remove all.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with ointments until they are healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	and if the corrosive is in the bone, then strike it, and pull out, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the doe ( likely a corruption or inflammation of the flesh) corrupted, then strike it in its place as previously said, and treat until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is frozen, and you drink, and it feels great pain, then it would be best to cure him first.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the wound with a straight edge at an angle in cutting across it upwards, and be sure that the cut does not come too close to the flesh under the wound, for the patient will feel too great pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it has happened, then put something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain from a sore throat
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joined bones in the hands of some men are charred and sometimes there is bone, and occasionally there is an ingrown nail, and sometimes the birth of a new joint does not occur at the root of the joint, or it occurs in no one.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those who are born in any way other than by the two, do not move afterwards, and those who are born at the joint of the two, perhaps will move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the cut on one who is emaciated is lighter, in this manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut the root of a large splint.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	That person who is born with a defect in the root of the joint will suffer from illness.
si te tien dou coper.	if they are tied under it.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In him who is born or must be cut at the bottom, if it suits to first copy around the circumference of the bone just on the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable stringed instrument for this purpose, then treat so that he is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The symptoms that come with a severe injury or condition often arise from birth, or due to sudden wounds, or by fire, or similar causes.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you cover the wound so that it heals, they must repair it according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two tents or cloths moistened in oil of roses so that it will not heal.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or put between two thin slices of onion so that it will be closed, if it is fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the symptoms come to any of its parts with the palm, then treat the wound as it suits.
des vils	Old age
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Where such large veins are swollen and full of melancholy fluxes, that they come to many other limbs.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and it happens more often in the legs of those who go to feet and who work and carry, rather than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you give them no enemas of bile, and then cleanse the spleen with basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The iron cure is done in two manners:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is that you cut them and treat the black vein;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other manner is that you tie a vein, and extract all the blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The cutting is done according to this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	first the leg of the person who is ill with hot water should be cut very hard, until the fat tissue is removed carefully, then extract the leg from the wound upwards to just below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then cut the vein in three places, with a large cut, then lift and extract the black vein at your finger, from head to toe, until as much blood comes out as the virtues of the patient can bear.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then tie, and he commands to take meat in sauce with black iron.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and resume the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are empty, and it harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	the elevating of his chest is according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	raise the leg of the patient if there is much hair on it, then put it in water, and he makes the leg soak in hot water until it becomes red and inflamed with veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have vinegar, heat it on the fire, and then make an incision directly into the vein at the long point of the elbow or in the area below the knee;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then cover the wound with linen, and burn the vein of each part until it appears when one feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and as you see it red and black, and when it enters the linen so that it seems like a white thread.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then pour out the blood from below, until it rises to the linen, and then take it up lightly, and cut into another level as before three times.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then burn the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift up the blood, as you have done, and cut into another linen, as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then cut another size, or as many as you need, then lift it up, and cut again at the foot, then take it and lift it to the second size.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then take out the bone by piece by piece until it is completely torn apart; then cut.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot treat and lift it, then prick the bone with a sharp needle twice on each side of the fracture, and apply the plaster from both sides, until it hardens.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And be sure it does not harden, for if it hardens, the bone cannot be treated or lifted and comes to cause harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have completely treated the wound, apply a cloth soaked in wine and olive oil to the patient's leg.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And care for him until he is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the bone is crooked and twisted and has become dislocated together, and it is not straight as we said, then it must be broken with great force, but do not cover it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of the iron wedge used to cut open a vein if it is curved and does not pierce, will damage the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of a large curve, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but when it is big as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is set in the legs, or in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and on dry land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it is found in other parts than the legs, and this happens because of putrefaction that comes from under the skin, just as it goes inside the body serpent-like and downward, set between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein cutting are such that it comes to the leg a great inflammation, then change the joints, and start cutting the vein vigorously, like one pulls out a root from a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the joint opens, it is advisable that you wrap around an inch and half of the knee with bandages from one side and a half to two inches on the other side, and the ligament, and leave the bandage on the leg, and every time it is not near the joint, wrap it again around the plonc, and the new.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the rest around, but do not cover its root, until it comes out entirely.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cut it, it may enter into the cartilage, and cause an abscess and putrefaction there, and a very bad illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because of which thing it is advisable to treat it little by little until the head, and leave nothing of it in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and sometimes this vein when treated with the palm of one's hand, or with X, and a man came to me, to whom it arose from X palms long, and when you copy it, so your blood flows out or gets pierced, and the puncture just reaches its source, so that everything is lost;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and let the material inside be evacuated, and let the medicine penetrate into its depths every day, then the cure is done as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes to this vein it comes down in rain, and itself when it opens up at the joint of the foot, or of the toe, and it comes out much blood, and from it there flows.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Therefore, cure as we have said beforehand.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between the skin and the flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called "disease of the cow" in our land, because it often occurs after drinking, and it has a small worm that nests between the hide and the flesh, and goes through the entire body, mounting and descending, and feels bad at the head as one member suffers until the hide opens or it escapes, and then fomits.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is corrupted by the pus of some humors, just like they come from serpents and worms and other parasites or intestines.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and there is doubt about its evilness, because when it goes through the body, and it climbs to the head, and it comes to the joints, by chance enters and destroys them.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see a cure being done and treated, so it cannot be done when it's cold.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	Then it is necessary to tie the limb above and below a strong thread tightly, then cut up and treat it, and if the vein is bound completely in its length, and you do not find it when applying the fire cautery on top, so that it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greater harm he causes is that he will run oil, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see him coming or near the oil, then bind under it with a cord, and cut up and treat.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	It is necessary to use the patient in a kind of purgative medicine for broken solutes of bodies, and he should be given food spoiled and putrid.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain which comes from overexertion
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and causes them to move from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I have seen this which I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was summoned to an ill woman, and she showed me on her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and then after a short while, I saw it rise again just like a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything, like living silver when it cuts through.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain left the arm, and set up in the shoulder, and then it came again after a short while, running through all the body until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	She now tells me she has torn her insides inside the body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was much surprised that she moved thus from member to member, because I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	I have tried to get it to move again for many people who had pain in their limbs before, but I did not do so with her, just as I saw in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought it was because of that which the woman had a cold body, and the women uncovered wounds, and for that she appeared to be in great distress.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and do not appear to be so for those who are healthy, and have moist bodies and wounds that heal.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see someone curing this sickness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we said, if the humors are above and below in abundance, and then strike at it until the great constraint leaves.
et cauterize le leu;	and cautery the joint;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you cannot see it with your eyes, then the cure of those who treat the swellings, such as fetid pills and serpent pills, and similar things.
des saiettes	from the arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are different, according to their appearance and according to the nature of each person's body or where they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The various kinds of them are that there are those with great points, and small ones, and spikes, and nails;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those that have parts;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and those who are found in any member, expelled according to two manners:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in the principal member, which is like a brain, liver, spleen, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When she falls then in any limb of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you after, appear to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	if it is fitting for you to remove this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many situations;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not properly extracted, take out the arrow and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And when the sign of the brain occurs, when the arrow shoots and pierces the bone, and blood comes forth from the skull, which causes seizures, and confusion, and swelling, and redness in the eye, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and disturbance of understanding, and vomiting blood.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps he has no fever of the nose, or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and sometimes it is in the throat and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and falls from the white, moist wound like flies, and leaps out in the same way as a stream of urine.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears to you, then take care of the wound, and remove the bandage if it's not on.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	the sign of the bandage when it's bleeding or congealing is that it's near the left nipple, and feels like it's been pierced in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the bandage dries up like the flies, and in darkened blood, it comes with cold sweat and frost, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	When the head of the shoulder feels a sense of doubt because the death comes.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of the arrow that does not bleed is only without any scum falling out of the wound, and its throat is swollen, and the patient's face turns red, and they gasp high and are chilled by the frost.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if an arrow sticks in the covering of the thigh, so that it is lodged between the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and causes great pain and great difficulty breathing.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And all the limbs of the shoulder move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, by chance so that it falls from the wound any indigestible meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, and it falls into nothing but air through the intestine, without any hope for the treatment or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if an arrow sticks in the bladder, and urine comes out suddenly and flows away, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Knowing that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, if they are cut and bruised and swollen and the shoulder and elbow and groins and axillary region and spine of the back and flanks and groin and thighs and limb, as the condition is: they are safe according to many opinions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it does not cause harm, as I will tell you, for that reason: that you may do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happens in the house with an arrow stuck in or near the root of the neck.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and the treatment of another patient from behind the ear took place, and was safe without any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And they tried to pull out an arrow that had been shot into the fat under the ear behind a piece of paper, and the arrow was pulled back, but no more than to the tip towards his fist, and the arrow was great like a Turkish bow to all the iron for easy pulling over ears;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	the treatment was successful, and no further bad accidents happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And they pulled out an arrow from the neck of a Christian, and it was an Arabic bow to the ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I cleaned the beards and pulled gently until I had done it, and the Christian was made safe.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And take an arrow to his house, where it had fallen on his stomach, and thought he was dying;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after having passed thirty days, he did not improve in his condition.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut up the arrow, and set it in place, and made a mark on it, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if I saw a patient who had an arrow stuck in his backside, and the wound was closed.
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remained inside him, and his natural disposition did not change, nor was he in pain for any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man who had an arrow stuck in his face, and the wounds were closed.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and he endured thus suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar afflictions.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And there was an arrow lodged in the king's palace at home, which had been shot into his left side, and was starting to decline towards the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was entirely blocked.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I went to see the physician after it happened three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound extremely narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried to extract it with great subtlety, but I didn't feel anything.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a puncture and pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it might be the tip of the arrow I placed above his liver and stomach, because they were swollen;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And the leeches of the arrow came out.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put the plaster on my hands every day, and solved the wound directly, and kept the patient for such a long time that they felt the arrow leech come out inside their nose.
et il le me dist.	and he told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put some medicine that is both sharp and corrosive on the wound every day, until it was fully opened, and I tried it, and you felt the head of the arrow dry out inside.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I pressed it into the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the leeches of the arrow appeared visibly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and after three months, I saw that the wound had opened up and I closed it with hot tongs on both sides, but couldn't get it out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	And so do not cease to subtilize and devise ways of instruments, until the day I took good tongs well-made, according to what its shape will come at the end of this chapter, until I tried it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And they judge that the membrane from the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it therefore, and the wounds were closed, and the sick were entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	I have told you the quality of extracting arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, because the books cannot grasp everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but wise masters know little but a small amount, and on what is present and faltering, find new work, and nine instruments, at the handling of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not penetrate or fall out of members where they are fixed, except for two kinds:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or from the side where they enter, or from another place.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and the one that falls from where it enters, is an arrow entering into the internal organs, and will never happen again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not fall now, let it remain as long as the wound is open and the pus is discharged.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, let it remain for some days, and move it every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it falls, and if it does not fall, if it pierces into something more substantial, until the internal organs are enlarged, and then take it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if an arrow is shot into the bone of the head, and it goes just in front of one of the two stomachs of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	but if it is not treated immediately, but lets it remain so long that it becomes even after some days, for if the arrow comes just in front of the brain surface, it's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is fixed only in the bone alone, and does not come out at the same spot, and the patient stays there some days without any new accident, then it engages itself into the treatment.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply lodged in that way and cannot be extracted, since I have said to you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the animal until it is healthy again.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is returned to the body of the animal if it cannot be seen again, and whoever has all the tentacles.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	If you feel it, then let it go with an instrumentable thing.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	But if you cannot open the wound due to its tightness and because of the deep extraction of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve in it, then let the wound be closed.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	If you can remove the arrow if it has ears in it because they hold, and if there is a chariot stuck on two parts of the bone that you can reach, then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And be subtle so that you do not break the arrow, but rather pull it out more forcefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, so that the pain is gone from both sides until the limb is put back in place, then try again, for the extraction (of the bone) is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the symptoms of bloodletting disagree with you, then follow what we have said about the treatment in this chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and take care of the incision on the nerve and vein, and tie a bandage in such a way that you can easily treat the arrow wound quickly, soon or firmly.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and put the patient back in the shape they were when the arrow hit them, because that is the greatest help to be found there, and if you cannot do so, then put him according to what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	the arrow that comes from another side, or if it is closed up in anything, or the skin is swollen on its own, whether we see it or feel it, apart.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	therefore draw the arrow up high, so that the tongs can take hold, and then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	if now they are swollen.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, so turn your hand around completely, until it enters into the bone, and then expand the bone, and pull.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	If it cannot come out, then let her go again, and then continue extracting until she comes.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrowhead was stuck in the flesh, drink the whole of the pus.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the arrowhead falls out, and you see the pus, then administer poultice, so that the tip of the arrow between the hair of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then drink more, and if the arrow is stuck in the head, so that you pour the instrument into the wound, to alleviate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow has entered into it, so it is fitting that you copy all of its length within or where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as it needs.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	and if the arrow sticks in the belly or more, or in the abdomen, or near the bladder, or on the side, and it is close to the surface, then you can cover it up, if you like.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and protect the vein and the nerve, and then pull it out, and then cauterize the wound, for that is proper.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the tongs used to remove arrows are like the beak of a bird, and thus we have this shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	big, small, and middle-sized, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form with the handle attached to the hair is like the feathers of a bird, to push into the tip of the arrow, as it is in this shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the nails for pressing and stitching is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins on the body common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	Veins from which one is saved are thirty-one, because it has sixteen veins, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two branches behind the ears, which are called "herbets".
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and two arteries that are in the left temple appearing.
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the right armpit of the right eye, which are called "aspieres".
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein which is inflamed at the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the head, swollen.
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two tendons that are near the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are above the lips of the mouth, and these are called "augerich" (or possibly "augeriche").
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins that are commonly found in each arm.
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, which is located on the left side of the chest, and they call it "vein of the head" (or possibly "vein at the forehead").
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the joint is called "fast" and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and they call it "venne du cuer" among the common people;
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic vein is found on the right side of the clavicle, and they call it "venne du ventre" among the common people, and it is located near the fissure, and that is the vein from which one heals, which opens up obviously in the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the radial vein is the vein that is between the auricular and ulnar bone, and it has two openings;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and on the foot are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is below the wing of the bicipital vein on the left side of the clavicle, and the second one located at the ankle on the right side of the clavicle;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the vein which is called "nasse", located at the other side of the joint.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below those ones.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The vein that is behind the ears, which is used to treat catarrhs and migraine.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the quality of the vein, just as I told you, is that you lift up the head of the patient and rub the vein with a rough cloth.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then the patient's neck is tightened with a rope until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	only if then you see the pulp under your thumb, and where you feel the pulse.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Take the lancet, and the tourniquet below the vein just until the bone, then raise your hand all along the vein upwards, strike and cut the vein well; you must do it twice to cross, and make the wound bleed.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then tie off and secure, until she is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have also said incising and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	Those suffering from double arteries in both temples, if they have ancient inflammation, and swelling, and eye problems accustomed, and to the eyes due to acute pain.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the patient if are so as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And when the patient dislocates his neck, so much that the two veins are tightly closed.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels pain below the elbow and then becomes numb;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lifts the vein up to the elbow above the wrist index finger, and cuts the lancet under, and lifts the vein up high, and pricks it, just as you have done in other veins, and make a cut according to your necessity;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then lifts the patient up, and puts his elbow on the vein for an hour, then puts cotton on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then forms a bandage, and leaves it until she is healed;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have discussed their cautery and extraction, as well as the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The illness of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the illness of the head, and has ancient diseases such as emigration, and redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that patients with straining turn their necks in twisting, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "trencher", whose shape is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and pierce upwards with your hand, or with something else, and let the wound bleed according to the quantity you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then deliver the patient to their neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and there is no sign of a flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	It's not suitable to describe a specific outcome for this prompt since it does not provide any context or results.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	And the healthy are prone to it, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flesh when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	Those who are sick in both veins that are in two arms will be aided with the eyes, and the tongue, and the redness, and the swelling by the ointment, and with diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and those whose sickness is that the patients twist their neck in a strange way, without any bond, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the healthy, and if their sickness is through the passage, some short, some long, some small, some large, because there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the skin is subtle, by chance may break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then sew the wound, so much as is necessary, and then tie it tightly up.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The sickness of the vein in the nails is so serious, and full of fever, and sharp pains, such as inflammation and redness that comes to the face, and most especially when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and if the wound becomes so serious that the patient clamps his neck, then pulls on his nails to your left hand, and takes out long, subtle flake, and strikes it into the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well in that place, and the pain will now begin.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And don't go too deeply into the wound, and do a clean cut according to your neediness, then tie it up for a night, because it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The sickness of the two glands is aided by the constricting of the vein, and at the beginning of swelling, and with much suffering, and with epilepsy, and with corrosions, and with herpes, and itching.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the qualities of the sickness are that the patients strain their neck away from one and the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and the masters standing above the patient's head and the patients cutting at one side of the vein, then heal the vein a little longer, then treat the wound temperately, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then make another incision on the other vein, then cut the ligament, and gently constrict the veins, so that the patient does not strangle.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let him just stay there until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the sickness of the feet.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sick of the veins on the lips are aided by coal in the mouth, and by corruption of gums, and tearing of lips, and they do not heal.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And you will test whether it is healing by sitting the patient in front of you, and constricting his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the wrist, and look at both veins, one is in the right hand's wrist and the other is in the left hand's wrist, which you can recognize by their black color, and because there are small black veins around them:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Therefore take both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and are in doubt, then cut the largest one on each side, and do so for all four veins, because it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the vein below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The patient suffering from wounds below the tongue benefits after the treatment of the cerebral region, and this is due to the constriction of the throat, and eye troubles, and mouth afflictions.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And if the healer is of such quality that he brings the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks under each corner a vein black.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then heal both the one and the other, and do not pierce too deeply, for under these are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the throat which are commonly healed are healed in two manners:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or piercing with a pointed needle to the full length of the mitten-sized vein, or an olive oil subtle as it is called "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And are large and subtle according to the size and tightness of veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The famous mercurial form is so renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And has necessity to open the vein cheeks that are smooth with a large amount of blood visible, and which contain a lot of blood and turbidity.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is like the form of a burning olive tree:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtle in application, and it is for healing the small veins subtly, or with subtle blood clots of citron.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The gall of the basilic, which is one of these veins, helps in all diseases that are under the throat, and near the collarbone, and near the chest, and near the stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is fitting for a lord that he should heal with his own blood, and that he should war against the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery and bleeding ensues, then it is fitting that he should staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and should not be pinched by the flame, but rather cut like a horse.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the ligature does not open immediately, it is advised to remove it and replace it with another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you want to give some blood, or you will make the vein open with a needle in the arm.
elle apert manifestement;	if it opens immediately;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and cuts the flame with a horse's knife, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you see the vein opening in front of you, so it is also advisable to remove the arm, touching the joint until you know the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the vein of the wound, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with a horse's knife;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and guard so you do not cut on the artery when you see it swollen, for this is of the artery:
eschui la donques.	choose accordingly.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protruding above as the urine of a child, and it is pale and subtle, know that this is without an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hurry up then, and put a tourniquet on long, then draw it off when there is no bleeding, for this often happens:
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	if the arm is stuck, and leave it so, and do not move the patient;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let fear have its way, and do not move him until he is cured.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	If he is not scratched at his birth, and it strikes him, and the medicine does not apply to him, then cut the artery when it opens up, because the head of it will retract.
et estainche li sans.	and scratches him without being noticed.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take a splinter from a thorn and insert it, then take one of the halves and tie it to the other well tied yesterday.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if he is not scratched, that's good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if so, if the treatment, as we have said, with powder that scratches blood;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the hemorrhages do not cause harm to more people with thin blood of the wound and with the power of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The sick woman in the middle is treated with a strong medicine for her head and body because she is composed of basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is fitting for the lord that he should be wounded in the lower nerve, and if he strikes too hard, and wounds the nerve, and it swells and his health is impaired, and by chance he cannot recover;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this nerve is often opened many times, and if it does not open in any other person because of its subtlety, it is fitting that you use the aseptic instrument on him;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And choose your poor (i.e. weakest) man for this task.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then pull it out long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The sick person of the head is treated with medicine for her head and also helps her eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to heal or staunch the wound with olive oil flame or myrtle flame, because this is the safest of all veins, for it does not damage the nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	It is necessary to seek the lighter part first, and do not grieve anything if you must start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance the swelling of the vein may occur in some people, but you do not grieve anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know to heal is that healing is only possible if it is done for the sake of preserving health, and in order to avoid future illnesses.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and whether healing is done on one of the three veins that are in question, namely
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	This is what the text means:
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And instruct the patient to fast in the beginning of prayer and at autumn and winter after cleansing, when the signs of replenishment appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and instruct to fast on the first day or third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The fasting that is recommended has no fixed duration for all diseases, but rather when it becomes necessary to fast on a day or during the night, in every hour and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not advisable to fast children under the age of XIII years, nor women who are pregnant only up to the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	It is not advisable to treat the elderly who have passed their 60th year.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when some people fast in any way, if he defecates the intestines of an easy enema, and has a great amount of feces retained, if the veins do not drain off the excess intestinal contents through the pores, causing harm to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	He who is too rich in flesh, nor in leprosy, so long as it remains unhealed, will not recover.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if the disease is caused after colic, vomiting, and decrease in stomach wind, and frequent urination with woman, and toil, watchfulness, and purging, then all the virtue, whether through an arm wound or from a bodily source;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	and then subtly correct the humors, if he is not greatly overfed, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have him eat bread.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and then take a bath, as nothing is to be feared, in order to further his cure, and he will recover from the wound in the vein on the third day, just as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And keep away from work, pain, and luxury, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And be calm and cheerful, and let the remedies be applied higher on those who are sick, and rub the arm twice or three times, then release the bandage in a moderate manner, because when it is too tight or not tight enough, it will not correct the limb without.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the patient's arms with his own hands, until the veins swell and you can feel them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then moisten the remedy with a small amount of oil, and put your left thumb on top of that vein below the patient's arm until it swells or fails to swell.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	Because there are veins that burst like strings at the patient, and some are so full of windiness, so that when you put the flame on them, they retreat again into the vein, and cannot be opened, and thus it happens to those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	If he has opened a vein, if the wound is too narrow, because of this you should advise the surgeons on these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if he has opened a vein for the first time, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	but if not, you should continue to reopen it a little lower or above the joint, if the swelling is still present.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the swelling is present and the patient hopes for a cure, if he lets it swell for one or two days and does not tie up the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	perhaps an abscess will form.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not enter into the bath, then reopen the wound if it pleases.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or without subtle treatment and you doubt that it will not cause much blood as you see, then be firm in that same wound itself with all its flame directly.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and the wound is handled quickly, so that the swelling may be reduced;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	because this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the swelling, do not re-open the wound again, and put on a little bit of lard oil, because it lightens the body in sickness, and is mild in this place like the oil that it is.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil of lard to each wound you treat, so as to dry up the flow of sickness.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this same thing causes a triangle and bow of pain, when you put it on the limb;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if subtlety is lost and splintering when it is too big.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if one comes across a large abscess, which often happens, when the vein is opened only at those times when it is very small, then hasten to it, and put on a sponge soaked in water and vinegar, with a bit of salt, and restrain for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is fitting to do this after the issue of the vein, and if it remains in the limb for some days without either blackening or greenening, then it will not be harmed.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on some aloes or mirror dissolved in calamine juice, monster.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times there is an abscess and appearance at the saint's wound:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	then take your hand up, and if you find the spot soft to the pressure of the hand, if that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Avoid therefore that you do not put anything of what we have said, because perhaps cutting without the artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but the artery must be ligated tight to harden the spot, then treat with another cure until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each person according to the quantity of their virtue, and the color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if they are not black, so let them issue blood as long as they are red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it large, let it be so that it becomes subtle.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if he is too cold, let him cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	It is necessary for the one who is weak and has need of extraction of blood to make a larger wound and let the fangs be wider.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the weak person, make the opposite, and it is necessary to heal them more quickly and often, and they should be healed by cutting across, not piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this way of healing is safe from deterioration of blood and compression of nerves, and it is better to heal quickly with a small cut than slowly with a long one.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for the one whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give moist pain in grape juice.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If it is scalded, if drawn from the wound three times or four; and if it is of cold temperament, if you apply a moist bread to the wounded flesh in honey syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if the palm is affected, after a great amount of blood has been lost, it is fitting that he drink a weak broth made from charcoal and fragrant syrup, and use other things we have said in the division or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to take out another limb, and heal himself again, it is fitting that when he is weakened by great blood loss, he should recover little by little, according to the continuity of his virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to take out another limb after the first blood loss, and he has a strong constitution, then he will recover in seven hours after the first bleeding, or in the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to heal himself on another part, should he be able to heal himself the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For it has much blood inside the body which is scalded, and brings on fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	so if you want to treat a great quantity of blood, and enlarge the puncture so much that it breaks into the brain.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you reward all the signs of recovery and place your hand above the swelling, lest death comes in its place, for this happens many times when the healer is careless.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not necessary when you see a dislocation, to untie the arm, and to make an incision a second time, and if the wound is closed, press firmly on top of.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	but if it is crooked, then extend the arm quickly, for this would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let him wait until he heals a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you will point to the tip of the flame, until the frozen flesh has broken open at the vein's wound, and put on some powder mixed with water, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is pulled out, let it go and do not hold it tightly, so that the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the wound needs to be treated again, on the same spot, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein on the arm is healed in place of the wound on the head because it was composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of dressing the wound is that the patient pours hot water on his hand, until the flesh is red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	After a while, bind it gently so that the vein appears well, then heal it now through and not too much or too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the large wounds be bound, and heal well near the joint of the hand, and if it will not come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the wound drain in the water, until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	but if it's in a cold state, do not put the hand back in hot water, for one puts it in winter rather than in heat.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and healing from this vein is more safe than any other vein, without artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing of the thumb nail is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Strain the hand, and pour hot water upon it, until the vein is drawn out, if you can see.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the vein bends and twists, and you cut it all the way through, do not cause any trouble.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not cut too far in because the nerves are now numb and dead from the cold, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the pain does not come out of the wound.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have cut the wound as much as necessary, put oil and sinew to close it quickly, and so do each of these things.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sickness of the left hand is equal to the disease of the mouse, and do it just as I told you over to the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sickness of the spleen is worth more than all other diseases that are in the body, as with illnesses of the stomach, and retention of flowers, and disease of the rains, and of the kidneys and old joints, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And tie off the vein if it is that you put some powder in hot water, and rub up the vein until it dies, and tie above the joint of the foot.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and if the vein is at the ankle, and comes up from under the foot to great swelling.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	The healthy ones when they are weak or more swollen, or at the ankle, what value.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you treat it on top of the bone, then ward off the evil that is below, and cut the healthy as well as the diseased.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and apply a blister.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out, so he puts his foot into the water, and leaves well to empty the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the healthy ones require it for the first time, then recapture it on top a little, because the pus is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do so with the same care for both feet.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The salt of the vein on the calf is at the ankle, and its pus is worth the pain in the hamstring, when it's for draining.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	and the qualities of its healing if it is that the sick are in or bathing, and extracting above the ankle four times by twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and when she opens, if you cut her so that it heals in all manner as you can, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it should be copied as much as possible because the limbs are swollen, and she is very sensitive to touch.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you cannot find it, so that the wound heals without any signs of blood or pus, on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the roots.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and do as many cuts on the wound until you see, and then tie the ligature, and put cotton and a bandage.
ele est maintenant sanee.	she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	From the venereal sicknesses.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Ventouses are made of horns, or thorns, or glass.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And if evacuation is done according to two manners:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	or by piercing and attracting blood, or by piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this evacuation which is done by piercing is according to two manners:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	or when it is with all fire, or with fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and evacuation done by piercing and blood extraction is performed in 13 ways of the body, so that one part may be all bone with the head.
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are emulsified with the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and the other two are in both sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the ventose below the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the wind of the two shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the wind above the thighs;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the winds above both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the winds of both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the winds of both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the woundings do not treat blood, unless for small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and because of them one weakens very little, just as one does when cutting into a vein.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be treated with heat, neither fire nor cold, in any disease that comes from overloading, until the entire body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if necessity demands because of illness, or by habit, so we bring it forth each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every interval;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are some who, when they need to bring it forth, have heavy heads;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and some who find repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and bleed.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and some who dream, and see blood and nausea and wounds and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	When we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to ventouse after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The illness of moisture supports the healthiness of the head ... which comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable for this to happen after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this ventilation is in place of the illness of the head, and it is not suitable for those who have a cold constitution to use, or who have flatulence, because this causes them much harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and therefore it is not suitable for the elderly to use it, or those who have head colds and other diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from this often become blind, and for that reason it is fitting to place the vacuum a little further down by the suspicion of blindness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	Ventilation of the neck is in place of the illness of the head and of the tonsils, and for this reason it is valued at constricting the breastbone, cutting into the channel of the stomach, and applying poultice, and treating with rest.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it is right to stop for a moment, because if she holds too tightly, so her stomach or back becomes twisted.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The swelling in the chest if it is near the collarbone causes pain in the head, eyelids and ears, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is in the place of a bellyache.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is right that you command the lord to express his hand before applying, so he does not cut an artery, and has no further bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The swelling under the chin if it causes mouth illness, and gum corruption, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and is in place of sore throats.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings under the shoulders value to a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The incisions on the thighs are worth as much as three veins of the arm, because they bring blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the master to not cut too deeply, for the flesh is naked from the bone, and it knows underneath the sinews and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The incisions on the rump are worth like emorrhoids of the fundament, and illnesses underneath, it is necessary that the incision be large, and made with hay, for they have need to treat well;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and in case it is subtle, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and will make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The incisions on the legs heal quickly, because they draw blood from the whole body, and are worth like old pains from the rain, and of malarial fever, and move the festerings;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	And they are located on both shoulders, and both knees, and whatever they weaken the body after long use, causes death in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to put on a suction is that you first put it empty, and then apply it correctly, and place it hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing so, until you see the vein red and swollen, and touch the redness of the wound;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then put on the suction again, and take care in the position of the body, because there are those who have contracted such diseases, and clerks.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	so it is fitting to strike once alone, and it is fitting to make large wounds, and a small depth.
et suce legierement.	and cut smoothly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if it is not big, so he should be pierced two times:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to subtley open the way for the great vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	and if it is very thick, so he should pierce it three times;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to catch the vein little by little, he should pierce it only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want a lot of blood, then we must start again often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if it is not thick, then we pierce him through and through, and finish the cut so that the veins are perceived suddenly, and cut at the person with big skin and tough flesh, who has big pores, you should anoint them with oil of aperitif and dissolving.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	It is made with olive violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of sesame seed.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	or oil from rue, or lily, or chamomile, or any other kind.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is big and cold, so take olive oil of marjoram, or balsam, or anise oil.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if that person has healthy skin and large pores, do not put oil on them, but instead wash it after the water rose, or cold water, or elderberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain berry water, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, lift them up with similar remedies, such as mint water and sumac.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	and those who have great swelling rise from a old wine, or dew, or decoction of anise and chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and should not be operated on with a vacuum before or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and should not sleep after the operation, and it is necessary that he warms up, when he must be operated on, and when he is swollen.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And warn those who recover are choleric, and if they do not become too angry and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if you must apply cold things, such as apples of Grenada and endives and lettuce at ease, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and boiled fish, and char of chestnut, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with a cold complexion, should apply syrup of honey and a sweet-smelling wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat boiled fish, and small fowl, and pease.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day it will be purged, he must drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is advisable to give some to certain houses triacle or mustard before the purging, or after, for comfort of the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And instruct the patient to let his hair grow long but not too long; for it is not fitting that he who is bald should drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The venesees that are applied to be painful are those that are placed over the liver, and the mouse, and podagra, and over the stomach and boils, and rashes, and hemorrhoids, for this member does not suffer from being pierced on or at it, and is done only in order to attract blood from one part of the body to another, just as we place them on the mammary glands when they are healing.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	in order to loosen the viscosity that is in the member, as we apply venesees to the stomach and boils in order to relax the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and to take away the pain, when there is suppuration or a stone, so that by its attractive power the suppuration goes away, or the stone falls out of place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And so he does it when you put him under the liver and under the spleen because the blood is retained there, and these vessels are emptied to clean only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And sometimes they are managed with fire, and sometimes plain water is poured, as in the case of diseases related to pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the vessel with hot water or cold water in which there are convallable herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the vacuum administered with fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm in depth, with the tip bent towards the middle like for piercing an arrow, so that if she hits the artery, the patient will not bleed on putting on the member;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And in the middle there should be a cross-shaped nail or iron, to tie a bandage on, and they should be large and small according to the disease and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the boils of children are different from those of adults, and thin ones than fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And you must then place this boil on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Take a candle made of wax or linen and put it inside the boil through the handle that is inside the boil, so that the light comes to the bottom of the boil, and does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the limb, and let your two fingers be above the wound that we have said about, so that when you take it off, if there is vapor coming out, and you remove the boil.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take off the linen in the same way, and reapply it frequently, if you have need.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the wound that is managed for chest pain, if it is full of fever, do not have a wound or an abscess, and are treated only when it is full of fever, and placed on the limb alone;
et c’est li forme:	and it is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	There are no treatments applied only to the gums and skin, such as incisions or stitches, like it is done for broken bones;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the nostrils of horses, as well as of dogs and mules, and similar animals;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user is such that when you find wounds that are in clean and clear water without risk of infection, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And let them tie up the hair with a warm water dressing, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their stomachs;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then let them bind a vein and apply pressure, and rub the member until it becomes red, and apply poultices;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are smooth and have healed, if it is possible to apply a tourniquet, then apply it, because this is most effective.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the limb from an anchor point, and then to water, very well, and then inspect it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the limb is healed too late after applying poultices, then apply a moist linen strip soaked in cold water, and put it on, until the poultices are dried.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if they are multiplied, he puts upon them vitriol crushed or vinegar, or similar things, until they are stung.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or, to heal the cold spots on the skin, you put moistened snowflakes or peeled-off flesh there, and let them dry so that they will stop now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you have more of the same thing needed, then take other poultices.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the poultices will not take hold, then rub the skin of the wound with fresh blood or prick an arrow so that the pus comes out, and then put it on, and at once as soon as they feel the wound, they dry.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are draining, then powder some aloes and sawdust, or ashes on a little bit, if it will now take hold.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	The Book of Injuries begins.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, for restoring fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Learn well, dear son, that the fire cautery is a matter so rare and unknown, that no one has ever seen it in any of the old books, nor have they read anything about it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the art is rare in our land, because I have never found any good one.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except that by the knowledge of the ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the art, and through experience, and by the habit of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have here described what is contained in this chapter, and condensed it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that must be used, as I did in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book about the sums of speech and the chapters or where the wise man puts his understanding, and keeps silent for so long that those who have experienced it will learn and acquire this noble art, and teach others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when breakage or dislocation or torsion or seizure comes to anyone, it is fitting to hasten to heal the sick person from one side and the other, unless any remedy is available, for weakness of body, or illness, or old age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if his teeth are very bad, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and when he consumes cold meats, that is to say cold joints, char of fish and fowl, and does not drink wine, nor eats any fatty foods, and does not stuff himself too much with meat which fills the veins with blood, until you have doubt about an abscess or inflammation in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the sick person has used the first treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the broken bones begin to heal, it is fitting that the patient be nourished with foods that cause great swelling, such as those which have viscosity, just like bread cooked in water, and ris, and testes, and piez, and pance de vaiche, and oefz, and fish, fresh ones, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For swelling caused by this nourishment appears sooner and happens more quickly than the break itself.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of old men and aged people cannot be well healed or soldered according to their nature due to the dryness of the members, nor those who are too soft, as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but a remedy can be found in crushing the large bones that have become hard and joined the limb together, until they strengthen as they were before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and this should be nourished with great foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	But the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because there are fractures that occur at the joints, and others caused by cutting, as if with the length of a pinhead to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And when there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture with a small split or crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And every kind should have its own instrument and proper equipment in restoration, according to what the memory brings with it;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs because the bone is twisted, and opens well by force, and happens near the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no curvature or bend at the shoulder joint, and the patient does not feel great pain.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it can still have curvature, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary to move your hand, but put on medicines that come after this, and then tighten now subtlety.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And says that the fracture that is in the arm, and are the two parts of the joint, they must now be put back equally, so that the abscess comes out.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if the abscess bursts, he must let it dry for one day, until the abscess is smoothed out.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then he puts it equal to the muscle that you can easily and surely apply pressure to, and says that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those where there are pieces.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	The patient must then bind himself, as it is fitting after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, then take out two parts, as it is either by hand or by foot, or by little fingers, or by two cords, or one cord and by hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are missing, repair them by all means as much as possible on each side, and make sure that through your work there is no new injury or pain for the patient;
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and put both joints of the bone in the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And let it feel good in your hand if you think it is not quite right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If the dressing is applied perfectly, and not too tightly strained or pressed so that they are subjected to hot and painful contractions in their work, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at a standstill, instruct the patient to hold it still, neither when awake nor asleep, neither turning, nor in any other manner.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the limb is securely fixed so that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, they are not at a standstill, and rather should be placed in such a position that they do not feel any pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and be careful that it is placed correctly, lest twisting occurs when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The part of the body that is broken is different in size and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and shoulders and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	so it is necessary to wrap a linen cloth of waxed and subtle thread;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, such as thighs and knees:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	so it is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard cord, because the wide cords embrace the entire large limb, and compress it evenly from all parts, so that there is no gap;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then tie around with light bands, three turns or four, according to the limb, and tighten your hand all over the cord, then go to the top of the break and tighten less, so that the break will slowly move away a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the joint little by little, so that you pierce a great part of the healthy flesh, then take another ligament, and turn back towards the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go back to the lower part of the break, and tighten it gently, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first rule above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put rags of linen or bandages between the ligatures, so that it is all even, then bind everything from above with a strip, and then put your arrows well made on it, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if it has inflammation or abscess, then put a soothing substance on the abscess, which will bring out the inflammation, and let it stay like that for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Now strain upon the arteries, and let them be of a heavy chain, or of a fust wood, or of palm splinters, and they should be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is fitting that the artery that one places on the break should be slightly larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and so long as it is necessary to the limb whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then strain the arteries in the same way as you did with the first ligature, then tie above with a thread of linen, just like on the first ligature over the break.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the tighter you tighten it, the less so.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is fitting that the thread should be smooth, not too thick nor too thin, and of fine linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For the head of the shoulder, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the arrowheads after the bandage is applied to their wounds, then put soaps of linen or wool under them, so that they do not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the nerves are broken, I will tell you the cure after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not advisable to strain or pull apart all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to put in stents unless after five days or seven, or according to your safety following a cautery.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and thus the way of the ancient embalmers for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and so you take flour that is kept by the walls of the mill, and mix it with much egg, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, because this is the common manner of the embalmers restoring fractures in many ways, especially for women and small children, since it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another manner of embalmers restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Prepare the cautery and antidotes and oil and gum Arabic and mustard, for X.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Mirror and aloes, for V.
alechil VIIII З.;	alce (or alchen) of the seventh degree, X.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make powder, and mix with honey and water.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the complexion of the person is hot, then use this plaster, because it has good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and saves many lives.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another kind of plaster that is worth its weight in gold.
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Prepare mustard and valerian, for X.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Mirror and aloes, 77 times.
acaice VI З.;	Aconitum 77 times.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Boil Armenian X, and pound well, and congeal with water or honey, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another method for emplastery with joints and after removing their bones, it calms the following pain, and uses the bone to cut the fracture.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Apply a new ointment, and mold it in ashes and oil cooked, and put on the limb.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Plaster casts do not restore the joint, but they are good for soothing abscesses and properly healing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another method of emplastery that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Apply leaves of dried fig and earthy leaves, together pounded, and make emplastery.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way of plaster for restoring the break in the bone and to alleviate the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour from each one;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and crush and mix with wine, and apply to the members being warmed up, mixing it with moist coriander water or cold water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to treat with more force than the first, when an abscess comes back to restore the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of valerian, and seeds of flax, balsam, meadowsweet, and licorice, and flowers of violet and chamomile from each one;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and crush and mix with salt water or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Iporcus writes in his book that you should not put oil and wax on the broken limb to restore it, except for this method alone, and he says that it should be between too dry and too damp.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one must place the broken limb above, to restore, things dry and warm, like mirrors and ointments and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way to apply a poultice that values injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take the hairs from the shaved and bald, or take those of the bird, and venom, and cut them equal, and break them, and make it an embalming paste and bind with a thread.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then lay the bone loose a little bit, and watch that the patient does not feel any pain, or that he is not troubled by his own bones.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if you do not lay it loose by hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the limb, or it pricks, with rest or swells, if you hasten and let it go, and remove now the embalming paste.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light drapery, and a sponge of moist sea water, and plunge into the water, and lift up the limb, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	After that, let the limb rest for an hour, then put it under a clean cloth, moistened in water or oil rose, and bind it up with a bandage, until you are sure of the abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and rest the inflammation in the limb, and may be cured of pain, then resume subtle incision, and a little emplaster, and do not strain it too hard as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and subtly until it is cured.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that there is an abscess on the cheek and redness and pain and swelling it has set in all over, and you have to apply plaster and tie it up again if it happens again, as you did with the first part.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if the limb does not come to an end as we have said, do not release it more than after three days or four or five or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and never let it remain for twenty days, as we see, until the fracture heals and the swelling approaches.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	And therefore you must hold it tighter first, and swell its flesh, just as I have said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the shoulder drying more than necessary, know that this will not come to anything;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	the disease arises from hot water then, every time you dislocate it, and this happens to everyone at least once a day, and also later.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	therefore cut off the swelling of the member, and make haste to do what the foolish barber does, which will leave the limb twisted.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	this is bad, and if it's caused by fear, and I see nothing else but to loosen and set it right.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various kinds of breaks
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many kinds of breaks, and diverse forms, and the causes are predetermined;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for it has fractures that are caused by the percussion of a spear, and the collarbone is broken all along the bone just below where it is embedded in the bone, as when hit or struck.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason it is called this kind of fracture "haicheure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Where the spear strikes the bone from above to pierce it, and is called this kind of fracture "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and there are two types of wounds for these two fractures, large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has been pierced by a thrust, or a cut, or from the bone of a stone, or from a blow on the bone of a stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has an ongoing fracture that approaches just below the skin where it is under the bone, or above the bone, and this injury is big or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is closed in the bone with as much subtlety as we sew, and there is a small split, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound made or by striking with iron or stone, or by falling, and pushes in a piece of bone into it, and its hairs are as they do when the cautery is applied to the cauterian (heater);
si entre li piere dedens.	if the stone goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	and this happens more often to those who have moist bones under their head, like that of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and happens in all these kinds of fractures where small pieces are discharged like dust;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	I will speak for him.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And know all kinds of breaks by removing them, and investigating, and by the corruption that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of hair is known through this: when you discover the bone, and you stroke upon it, if the break is opened.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, be careful for accidents in the patient, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of intellect, swelling, paleness, fever, and the eyes protruding and reddening, and other similar symptoms, then it cannot be cured without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an impossible accident, and you expect a recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the patient comes to you for the first time, and it is in winter, it is fitting to remove the bone in front of the 14th day before the moon.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this is the case, hastening to remove the bone in front of the 7th day instead will bring about corruption of the tissue underneath the bone, and come the accidents that we have stated.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the bone fracture comes just to the wound that covers the brain, you should cut the fractured part in this way:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	Instruct the patient to press firmly on the head and discover where under the skin you can find it, in all ways that you can, and with the shape of the wound as soft as possible; for when the blood stops coming out from discovering the bone, or the abscess closes, he must use what is necessary, and it is so that you fill the space with wet draplings soaked in olive oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	And then make the wound rest until the abscess closes, and be sure that there is no more blood coming out.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then begin to remove the bone, and this is done in two ways of work.
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one way is to copy the narrow cut on the front, and that's the shape:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then you must break the other limb more than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second manner is that you have many different knives, some are three-edged and others long, and they should be sharp and made of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and when you apply it lightly, so that you do not hit the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and tough, it is wise to pierce it through so that you can administer knives with care, neither cutting too deeply nor piercing further than the bone of the joint, and leaving on the edge of the point a margin or circle, so that the point does not go beyond the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and it is wise to have many, so that each one comes in its proper place of the joint space, so that you have knives for all tests.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of the three kinds of tarses:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The ones that pierce through the bone when it is broken are pierced with one tare (tongue) on the bone, and turned to your two hands so you know when the bone has been pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then put the tare in another place a little after that, and do it all around, then cut at the incisions the space of the bone between the punctures, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you touch the bone with your hand, or on any other tool you have, such as pliers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and be careful that you do not touch the brain or the spongy part.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, so that you can retrieve what is left in the bone after another instrument like an incisor, but it should be more subtle and more refined than the other instruments.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	but if it leaves nothing of the small bones, or no scutes, if the bone is lightly attached to other instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound of tenons and ligatures that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And other methods, if what the Galenians say is true, which is more accurate;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and it is much stronger, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, at this place or where there is a fracture open, so when you have uncovered that part, you will put below the head of this incision, lens-shaped, because it is this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side, and if the part is diseased in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Puis fier de petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l'os tout entor, et te donne bien en garde de la toile qui est dessous.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	When she is irritated to the bone, cutting it lightly, because the bone causes great pain and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break of the bone does not penetrate to the skin, and the bone is broken only above, and there are small pieces, so it covers again that roughness, and removes the scales with a subtle rasp that you must have in various quantities, in order to fit each one as comfortably as possible, according to the work and figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you choose before many raspers, and after more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	For each other type of hair cutting and subtle breakage, it is necessary to consider the cause according to its direction;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this is something that cannot be replied by one who has put his knowledge in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the sac is uncovered, it is necessary to take out the drapery of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and wet it in rose oil, and put it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another cloth doubled in II or in III, and soak it in wine and oil rosary, and put it on the first cloth;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	And do this more lightly than you can, so that you don't weigh too heavily on it, then administer over the second cloth, and do not strain it further than when it only reveals the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	And leave it thus for one day or two, until the abscesses have subsided, then remove it, and administer medicine as with willow roots, flour of fenugreek, powder of incense, and aromatics, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And make powder of these things, and put it on the wound, and administer as usual medicines with rubbing.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	And beware that the wound becomes infected and clean, lest you do not leave the ointment on it, or do not let it assemble with a bow, for when the bow assembles upon the cloth of the brain, so does the corruption and pestilence, and it brings great evil to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when you put up a sharp instrument on the skin, it freezes below.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Precaution first then, if no other accidents come to the patient as we have said, because it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if the blackness does not come from the medicine that we have put on it, and the virtue has some effect, then you should take a piece of honey, three parts of rose oil, and one part of adhesive, and apply them on the sharp instrument;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply a remedy in ways of treatments until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Things that are never broken into two parts, except for one part by itself, because they are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And this one is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary to put your little finger or bony protrusion into the fracture and set the break in place according to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do it lightly, and take care that the patient does not feel pain due to your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the break is in the upper part of the neck, and it cannot come down to its place, so that you put an equal weight on the head of a straw a little bit thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, then repeat this process, and hasten to restore it the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If it is not so, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses are calmed down, then boil the head with new linen cloths, if the breakage is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Where you pour another of another kind, if the breakage is;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the cloths be so large that they fill the wounds of the head.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And said a restorer that we must moisten the coverings in butter, and move each person daily.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	I do not think that is quite right, but it should be moistened in the composition of honey and miller's powder;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then let the cloth remain, until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And at no time pour in onions of goose into it instead of cloths, and if the wound is covered up and kept still, and holds the breakage together, and blows gently on him;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	The instruction to do this task
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the head while you are working, apply hot or wet cotton in oil rose, or in a poultice of dayquil.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess does not come, then apply plaster by default, made of flour of sesame, and powder of incense, mixed with honey, then place it on light caustic, and do not tie the nose.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the nasal fracture is small, and it has been broken into little pieces, then draw out with suitable instruments what can be removed, then close the wound, and apply to cure wounds that require tarring or soldering, as does plaster and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the nose, then apply a cure for wounds, and put sticks of wood in until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	About the jaw fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured under, and there is no wound to prevent it, and the fracture is only present, without breakage in others, if one notices a slight swelling.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is fitting, if the breakage occurs in the right hand, that you put your thumb into the mouth of the patient;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the breakage occurs in the left jaw, put your thumb of the right hand into the mouth and gently push the break inside, and cover it with the other hand to keep it in place.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced upward by two parts, it is fitting that you extend the second part so that they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the movement of the teeth has occurred, or a fracture, then bind with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put a layer of wax on the broken jaw and a double cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and put on the outer cloth an estee well-made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it there with what you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and serve him light victuals.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the figure changes, let him lie on his back every day, and then put it in place what was changing.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and put plaster on it, made of powder from the mill with abundance of oil or flour of sesame, after you have extracted the fat.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and put on a lighter layer of plaster, and if the plaster sets, and the patient's condition does not change, let him remain so until he is healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	often healing occurs within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes on a joint, then follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if it has a break and wound together, reward no piece of bone that is exposed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if subtlety of the extracted bone causes swelling.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have extracted all those bones and it remains empty for a while, cut the wound, if it is wide, and apply plaster according to what is suitable, in order to prevent infection, until it is safe.
de la forcele	of the gallbladder
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The force breaks multiple times before, over the shoulder, and the breakages occur in three different manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	or if it is broken and split into two parts, and it heals faster.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or where there are breaks with wounds.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the treatments are when the breaks occur with wounds, that you have two remedies, so that one of them tugs on the shoulder joint where the break is.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other stretches the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then puts the break into your two hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or swelling.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you have to extend it further, then place the round spear of cloth or linen over the shoulder of the patient.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and hold and lift the swelling, and tie the spear with your hand, so that you put equal pressure on the break, as it requires.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you cannot treat the head of the fracture outside, because it is coming in full, then it is fitting that the patient lies on his back and puts a bolster under the shoulder; and gives to the minister's shoulder downwards, so that the bones of the fracture are lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then instruct the break to be on your right hand, and if you find any dead parts, it is fitting that you cut them off;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and throw away the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined together due to any swelling, if you cut at one of your joints;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but place over the swelling this instrument, to guard the wound;
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	And it seems like a spoon, and is not hair, and is as large as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the worker.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	And has two heads, just like you see it, and one is large, and the other is narrow, just as is the route of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are certain of the thickness of the abscess, count the wound, and if the route is small, then doubt the thickening of the abscess, apply the wound with drapes and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes to a head, apply it in oil of rose and in ashes and in wine, and put on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The binding of the bone, when it is against wounds and swelling, is that you place the bone under the plaster of powder from the mill and of horse manure, and put lightweight stones above, and a spear below the axle, if need be;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very long bandage of one palm's width, then place two drapes over it on the stumps, and tie it.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a small needle of three to four fingers' width and long, and tie it around the bandage so that the head of the bandage is on top.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and place the needle on the break, and turn the bandage up on the neck, and under the healthy side, and under the sick side.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and tie from each side, and when you see that the ligature holds the break in place, and you see clearly that the needle does not move over the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligature is looser, tighten it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on his back, and put him on a small pillow under the head, to lift the shoulder joint up.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if the broken collarbone is alleviated by adjusting the shoulder joint, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it in case of a bad accident, for twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then resume the plastering if you see it necessary, and bind and leave him in that state until he is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and she is restored after twenty-eight days, and fewer than any others.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of a shoulder break
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It rarely happens that a shoulder break or separation causes him to lose his strength, and it is only through touch.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	If it appears according to the form of the breakage, and you reset it according to its natural shape, in all the ways that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then put on the limb powder from the mill with much salt and fine dust, and puts over it a double cloth;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then puts on a broad and subtle spearhead, a little broader than the shoulder, and smooths out the spearhead in any spot of the shoulder, so that the speareth cuts equally;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then tightens it firmly to a great band, so that the spearhead does not move from its place, and watches the ligament every day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and every time it is moistened, so tightens the band, and puts back the spearhead if it has moved from its place, and lays the patient on his chest;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder is reset after twenty days or twenty-five.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when these numbers are completed, if the dislocation is corrected, and you are sure, because it's not the bone that is put back in place lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	If a piece of the bone is torn away and points downwards under the skin, it should be pulled out upwards, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The flesh is never broken at the point of the dislocation, but it happens sometimes;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it breaks often before.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it inclines towards the underside, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of warmth, and swelling, and by chance vomit blood, and expose the broken marrow, and the flesh feels bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and you place an armpit between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the two breast bones with your hands, and be subtle in placing them in all ways, so that the figure of the bone becomes as it should;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then put on splints and poultices above the subtle bone of salt, or a lighter fist, and lift it in an iron band, and bind it to the broken bone, so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and round the ligature to the back, and tighten it immediately, and reward each hour the wound, and if it swells, tighten the strait;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it seems wise to loosen the bandage, because of corrosion or itching that comes to the patient, or pain or abscess, if you hasten and loosen it, and scrape off the poultice, and address what is coming from it in ways of cure;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then scrape off the poultice, and tighten the strait until it is safe.
de la brisure des costes	of the fractured ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	The broken ribs do not happen from the large ones after the back and in the head inside, they bend only because they are crooked;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and feel quite good with the inquiry as it should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the remedies are that you put equal the break, as it is fitting.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply plaster and bind with a stick if you have need.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the ribs break are declining inside, the patient feels great pain and puncture, just as with pleurisy, because the bone points at the membrane;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and they have pains, and swellings, and vomiting great plant of blood, and it is a source of ill health, and the old men have put great strength.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say it is proper to administer meat that inflates the belly, in order to break the fracture away from the bone.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this unless pus comes out of the wound.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then the blood.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they say that one should apply windbags on the limb, to cut off the flow, and it seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	All sorts of diseases occur from air entering the body due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should cover the limb with a linen cloth soaked in hot oil, and put tourniquets between the ribs to straighten the joint, then treat the patient with the cure of bleeding, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient suffers great pain from the bone piercing the lung, and there is doubt about it, then it is advisable to break open the lung of the broken rib, and it is wise to put some instrument to guard the wound.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And thus one must cut the bone, and treat lightly, and then sew both cheeks of the wound, if it is great, and apply plaster to heal until he is cured.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if an abscess comes to a head, then put on moist cloths in oil rose, and put on the wound.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat while the wound heals of that which it is necessary for the abscess, and apply ointment to the place where it must be, until he is cured.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken collarbone.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	There is no break as a result of the bone of the neck, and little happens if it bends;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it happens that there is a fracture and you see whether he will be healed or not, if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move nor stretch, and when you press them with an needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Those who have died from more severe dislocations, and if they are silent and feel well when their joints are strained and not moved, know that the bone joint is saved, and that patients recover, if it is put in treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healing or not, take care that the joints are softened, and if the accident is in the hands, and on the back, one feels a violent motion and emission against will.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one has it set upon his belly, he feels a violent emission against will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is put back onto its own back and it wants to be healed, but cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	It is mortal.
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if he does not work properly in his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to pass, then it is a lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the cure says that if you reward him if he has an abscess hot, put oil of rose or oil from mutton fat on the spine, until it is pacified.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then puts on one of the plasters comforting and drying, and binds it with a bandage, and instructs the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And does not lie down on that part where he feels the pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if some bones are cracked, then it is advisable to cover the wound;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then set the bone, and assemble the two lips of the wound, if they are large, with a suture, and apply ointment made from pitch, until it is healed;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is fractured, which are called "head of the knee", then put your left hand in your pouch and place it equal to the other hand on your palm, then put the plaster and the stile on, if you have need;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Instruct to bind the patient, and if it has swollen bones, then cut above them, and extract the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break of the shin bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	There is a chance that the shinbone will be broken, and if it has, then do not worry too much for only a little alleviation at the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And stretch to the length, and pull down to the joints, and it will come to the patient with pain in the limb, aching, and swelling.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And if there is healing, then stretch your hand over it, until you are above the fracture.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and mark how the bone and joint are.
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the fracture is only in the head, then mark this bone and make it even until it has taken on its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it inclines towards the inside, then have the patient lie on his stomach, until the restoration of that fracture has been made known.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it even, put on the plaster, then put on an arrow made of wood or bone, and strain the break so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and apply the plaster on both sides of the cost, until the wound is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to lie on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if an abscess comes up, do not touch it, until the abscess is allayed, and put on what we have said before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as necessary, if there is no further injury.
et c’est li maniere.	And this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of a shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The joint is that which is between the shoulder and the cut of the arm, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	Dont one is to take a large iron rod, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two shoulders together, and fasten them up high, and sit the patient on a stool;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then lift the broken limb to the place of the bone, until it comes to an anvil, and attach a strap of iron to it, then fasten on any weighty thing that is given to him to endure.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then put the linen over the broken limb in its proper place, so that the break may return to its proper position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is that you serve the patient on his bed, and tie his hand to his neck; then command two servants to pull up the part above the breakage with their hands, and the others below by all its joints, and stretch out each one to their side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then tie the joint below the breakage, and above the breakage, and stretch each one of the servants to their side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, so that you may put a middle rope under the anvil, and the other towards the back, under the break;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and also if the fracture occurs in the heel, so it is necessary to put a light ligature on it lightly, without labor, until the fracture is even with its joint, and with its skin.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	then put the fracture back in place if it seems right to you, and hold tight, so that pus does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if pus comes, do not hold tight for seven days, and put a moist cloth on it in a clean place with rose oil, until the pus is calmed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then hold tight, and the way to hold it is such that you put the plaster on the fracture, then reassemble the arm on the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and tie the bandage and restrain under the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in place, unless any part of it impedes its movement, or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use a splint, and place two larger and stronger splints on either side of the break, with one space between each splint, so that each splint spans the break three times from each part;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then tighten the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break, stronger and less loosely.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see how the splint is applied and tightened, as we have said, when restoring the injured member, and you doubt whether to leave the abscess alone for seven days, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	the patient should look at each of them every three days to see if the swelling is going away, or if it will come back to life, and the pus cannot come out from the member because it is too strained.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the advice, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	But if such accidents do not happen, then only to free the man after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and put his hands under his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and on the shoulder put a cloth in the shape of an arrow, equally plain, and look at each one every hour of the day or night, whether the figure of the broken limb is fixed or not, or if the ligaments are softened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it happens by the power of medicine, and you give him the meat that we have placed before him, in such a way that the meat is first finely chopped;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when he comes to try again, so it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	and it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be reset in forty days from the start.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and therefore one must untie and administer baths and medicine to ease the pain.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	If the bowstring is twisted and stuck, so that it cannot be untied for one or two days.
de la brisure du bras	Of a broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	the arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossicle", one small and that one which forms the pouch.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is under, towards the small bone;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	by chance break the large ossicle alone, or the small one, and by chance join them together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the bones are broken, restoration is light, and healing.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the great bones are broken, so is healing, and it is more grievous than when they were broken at first.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bone that broke alone, you must gently extend it, and set it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if that's a great fracture, then one must strain harder;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend the splint above the cussion, and tighten the pouch of his hand higher than others, and the bones should be set lower than others as well, and let the patient cross his own limbs, and the cussion in front of him shall be raised higher so that the patient may suffer no labor;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the minister's thumb to the lower part of his arm or at the joint, and another minister on top.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put him in the mirror, according to his best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breakage there are pieces, each one put back in its place; and if it has no matching part that can be held together, and you cannot restore it to its proper place, then make a bone cast, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with a break there is an injury, I have spoken about it to the singular doctor;
si pren la cure.	if they take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses that form pus, I apply a cloth made from ghee oil and white beeswax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and the cloth applied above is done subtly, until the abscesses are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then I take out the ghee, and I apply the plaster of powder milled with a lot of wine, because I put the stitches, and so that the stitch from the break is made stronger, and a little bit larger than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	And you know that he must have six stitches or more in wounds or injuries.
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	Whether the fracture is in one of the bones or two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	And tie more tightly above the fracture than in other places, and every day less when removing, as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	And let the dressings that are on top of the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And let the strings that hold it in place be made of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the joint after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if some other misfortune comes to the limb, such as itching that is coming to the limb, it is fitting to raise the limb in hot water until the itching is relieved.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And let the limb not remain still.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then tighten the binding, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones deviated, it is like a similar case, so address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tightly bound, so that it can be freed, it is fitting to loosen it a little, and let it remain for some days, until the swelling subsides, and then tighten.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said will come to the patient, then do not bind or release anything within twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	and asks the person to place his hands on his neck, and if their necks are even, then he will guard against movement and digitation, and let him sleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and knows that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five days, and by chance in twenty days, according to the composition and complexion of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	know that at the back of the hand there is little fracture, and it often comes to nothing but inflammation many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the finger of the hand is broken or bent, it is advisable for the patient to tie a cross around himself and sit upright in the same manner.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then places his hand over the stretched joint and stretches out the broken bones, and sets equal the joints of the fingers, until they are well joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And applies the plaster and dressings; if no abscess comes, then he puts a stethoscope according to its quantity.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and it is wrapped in an iodized cloth of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the break is at the joint of the arm near to the belly of the hand, then he makes a splint of cloth, and instructs the patient to wrap his broken hand.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then the wrapping of a length of cloth, and so fastens the bandage as large as the plant of his hand, and wraps it, just as is needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is in the finger, then it is advisable to put a splint above and another below the palm, so that the hand is straightened and upright, and then bind him all around with the hand, and secure the ligature between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the break comes to no one of us of the two, and it is swollen, then he lets it be even, just as is needed.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And hold with the plant [i.e. finger or toe] and if you see so put a small stake straight for lifting the break, and it does not move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the break is on other sides such as in the index or one of the others, so that it is even, and the link with the good vein which is after;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you tie them all in the same way as before, whatever value it has, or if you put a stake up, such as a pouched one;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the abscess, and heal those who come to you, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the shoulder breaks
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the scapula is often broken, and one can see well when it turns in front and behind;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and let him bind with linen above the fracture, and below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And let the patient sit with his face, then stretch out each minister's linen equally.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture is set in place against the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the shoulder, then there are either one of the ligaments towards the bone, and the others below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	and also if it is near the groin, and then so let the linen be tied around the groin, and so let the extension below.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then put the splint upon the bone equally to its two hands, so that it conforms to his natural shape, and then apply plaster, and linen, so that no arrow comes near.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is an abscess like that, let it be allayed then return to your work and to your treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The limb is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap the limb around the fracture with a bandage doubled in II or III, and keep the swelling, then turn the leg until the heel reaches the root of the nail, and put I long thread between the crotch and the leg, loosening below the knee, and pulling the head of the thread above.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then turn the leg and the crotch with the bandage, then put a splint on the fracture, and put another splint on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then apply the leg eight between the thigh and crotch with soft fabrics to tighten the binding, then begin to tie in a bow of III or IV knots on the fracture.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And when you go further up of the fracture, and less it is constricted;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then tie both knees of the cloth that you have poured between the leg and the thigh, and tie three strings that are above, then return below to the head of the cloth, until you find the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and tie it, if it does not move out of its place, then let it stay so, then if there is no swelling or abscess or other sign.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it has (swelling), if you separate it, and address the thing that comes, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if it has pieces of bone that grasp, then you must sew them, if possible;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if we cannot, then it is proper to break down the limb, and treat it with force.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	as has been said, so that the patient may be healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes is broken the chest in such a way as when we insert stitches, just like in the shoulder and arm.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	and will not close again in the same way the patient has been restored.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And so it is known that the cube can be restored in three or four days, or slightly more or less, according to the diversity of the complexion.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the gallbladder
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	They say that in the hollow of the groin there is often a break but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	But if it breaks, then it's not just a cut or a rupture, but rather an opening or a wound, which causes all pain and feels painful.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	and the restoration is as if we make equal those things that are broken at their two ends, so they may be assembled and put together when possible.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then apply plaster, and put a rounded arrow around it, if necessary; then bind as needed, and after all the arrangements we have said for other fractures, just like the abscess and another similar thing.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it happens to anyone of these accidents which they must avoid, until they are healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg fracture
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	We know that in the leg there are two bones; one is called by the right name "moustelle", and the other is called "fossicle".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And all other fractures come to the arm, and for this is the restoration just like the arm itself, and the wounds are all one; and if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bones break, turn in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the big bone is broken, it causes great pain and you can see it well;
et torne desoz.	and turn downward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	And then apply an extension, and set it equal, and tie the splints equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	But the whole view is necessary, for it is required that if the fracture is ugly and there are many pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and in proportion to its worth.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of cloth that are red and purple in color, and are long from the knee down to the joints.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then tie both ends of the bandage above and below in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And no one should apply two strips of cloth from the knee down to prevent movement in that joint where there is a wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	And move every day the limb, to see if it has an abscess or another accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	So that he may be healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the bone of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the knee there comes no break, but sometimes when a bone is on its foot it breaks and causes a wound, and in some cases only swelling.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if he has a broken bone with an exposed bone protruding from another, and you see these bones touching each other, if the patient lies on his side, as if he were walking, and then put now your foot on his side, where the bones are raised, press it so that they come together again in their place.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then apply plaster and binding on the wound, and place over his belly with a small plate to two exposed bones, then strain him onto the affected limb, afterwards you wrapped in bandages, and other things which you have need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if you release the bandage, for you will find that the bones are evened out, whether they are broken, or swollen.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if it has some of the bones broken, so they repair them, just like we said about the bones of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then put an splint on the broken bone according to its length, and so that it is not too big, then place the foot on the table as I have said, and hold fast.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, then put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, and hold the table under the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and if it is standing with the head of the table near to the belly of the foot, so that he can hold it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And be sure not to forget the other things I have said about other broken bones, since we have spoken of them.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And treat each injury as it is suitable.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the bone at the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bones of a woman's body are broken, so that she grows and swells, then incline her to the part of the back of the head, and hold her behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the belly of the woman with woolen clothes, and put there just as much as is.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then tie up the woman, and lift her back little by little, and thus pull out the wool, until it comes to the opening of her body, and returns the bone with the same amount.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, pull out the wool, and when she has urinated, put it back again, and do thus for seven days before.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If it is restored the break, and you see, take a vessel of wool, and tie to the puncture a cord, and pour all the vessel into the body.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then breathe through the cord formed, until the vessel is blown inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	the body will return to the break;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then be filled with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone at the elbow of a child or woman is broken, or restored in the same way as we have said for the os of the hazel nut.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these nearby breaks are not concealed by one who makes his study and practice, and pays attention to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the break signifies more opportunities on the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	and then therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the phallus, when it is broken, take a goose's neck and swallow the phallus;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap up the bandages around it, and let it remain for three days or more, and he will be cured in a short time.
de brisure avec plaie	of breaks with wounds
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is to be believed that the one who has breaks with wounds, especially if it is great, like the bones of the shoulder or arm or similar ones, will be healed now, if the remedies we have said testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, then apply vitreous (glass) to it, for if you have nothing else, do so again on the same day or the next day, unless an abscess forms.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess forms, then leave the restoration for the next new day, until the abscess is allayed, and do not touch it or set it again on the third or fourth day, for you will cause a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone break is found near the joint of the shoulder, it is fitting to tie (or set) you lightly on the tip of your finger with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension does not have provided for the placement of equal numbers on your hands, when using this instrument made of iron, which has seven fingers or eight, and the length is according to the quantity of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for that reason is a skill of the barber who must press three or four times, according to what he needs in each wound.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and if it is swollen and small, that when not compressed on the limb above, will not bend at all, and be swollen in front, and large from the middle to the forehead.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	and is called "palanche", because it must be placed above the curved bones of the skull.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and apply it once, as long as it clings, and make the swollen one equal to the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	But if the break is subtle and the splints cannot well take hold of the bone, it is advised that you copy the head of the bone, until the splints have a good grip.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said, then apply it with an instrument suitable for that, such as cutting or sawing.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then retrieve what is stuck in the bone due to roughness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is restored and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that he is not in his natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you do it so that it is in its place, then fill the wound with a vinegar-soaked cloth, and this is how one should do it;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and put no more on the wound than clay or another substance with oil, lest it bring putrefaction and corruption;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then apply stitches until you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the entire surface, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the break;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times they have done this to the foolish man, and brought the patient either death or corruption.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and so let the restraints be softer and more gentle for other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or great, and you doubt that more accidents will come, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, so it cannot be treated with nails.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but tie him up with ropes and hard bonds, and the limb.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after the first day or the second day that the bow is stuck to the wound, so keep what you put on top of it in all wine, and apply soothing salve for wounds, as a salve tetrafarmacon and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is cooled and cleansed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be tied in a way that the bow can move freely along its edge lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day the wound does not heal, and it only gets worse again with new bowing, see that there are little pieces of bone, for this reason you must want to treat the wound with poultice, and remove all these useless parts that come from the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	If a fistula comes to the liver, or another kind of corruption, then it is wise that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter before this.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and opens up on the limb, as with the ribs or shoulder blade, and other large joints, do not treat it because many die, but let it heal.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	if by chance it falls out after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound, if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of those who come from the stool (feces).
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We come many times after the health of the break, equally when it is near the joint, and see a bad thing to behold at the figure of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance, the limbs cannot do their own work naturally.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care then if we see that it is fresh;
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	so if the administrator gives medicinal drugs such as aloes, incense, and mirror, and sarcocolle, aconite, and similar other things, so that you do not take any of these things, or all together, and mix with vinegar medicinally or with a lot of wine or with oil;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and puts it on the nose in a poultice, and presses well, and does not loosen it with his hands each day;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then it loosens, and begins again, until the knots are pulled out;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you strain on a well-made splint;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	because the property of the splint is that it pulls out all the swellings from above the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the knot is converted into a hardened swelling as hard as stone, and it must be pulled out, if the flesh beneath, and the obvious superficiality appear;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you remove it to a smooth surface, until it is pulled out, and the treatment until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A limb which is weak after the garrison.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the break in the bone is restored, and it stays after the weak and subtle limbs, for many causes:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	Because one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as much as it needed to be.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there is too many ligatures and cannot come the swelling in the member;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or for multiple swellings;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or for too great movements, neither in its hour.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because it has little blood in his body, and is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the doctor says that you should make the patient eat, and make his body soft, until there is no swelling in him.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer a bath, and give joy and relaxation;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Now apply the poux to the limb, so that the poux attracts a great swelling, and it often rises with much pain until the swelling subsides from the limb.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	One tortured limb after the health.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, one should not try to restore its natural shape.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	if one does not believe the foolish people who say that you must break the limb anew, and many fools have done this in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these works are blamed, and it brings great harm, and by chance one dies.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	otherwise, if the nodations and tortures are fresh, it is to be preferred that they should be raised with hot water, or herbs are cooked, like those of valerian, roots, and meadowsweet, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	Instruct the doctor to apply a mollifying plaster, just like quailon does well, and take the musk of violets, and mix with fat of geese or olive oil, and apply it on.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Or take greasy figs, and grind them with flour of rye, and similar medicines that soften the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the nodal joint is loosened by constant friction and prolonged rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And move each limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the twisted bone is old and hardened, like stone, and requires plaster of iron, so that it covers just above the bone, at the subtle incision lightly.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put cushioning and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes upon, if it can be now set in place again.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, since swelling of the limbs, and by chance, if it is reset with pains.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	because you do not need to move at all, when it is swollen.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times pain and other pains have been brought on.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	whenever it happens, if you make the patient healthy again, then leave him alone, until the swelling subsides.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then apply the limb to cold water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as the treatment comes in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have prescribed the chapters for dislocation of the head joint at a price.
des mandibules	of the jawbones.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	and sometimes the jaws are displaced inward, and joint dislocations of both sides occur in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	or they have a small bone of their joints, and softening a little.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	When they are completely dislocated and hanging down towards the chest, and you cannot hold back their vomit, nor close your mouth, nor keep it inside, they swallow with their tongue along with their speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When small dislocations occur, they return to their original place by multiple movements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you should reset it quickly, and do not postpone.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the ministers take out the chief from the patient, and pour some powder of mice into one of his hands at the root of the dislocated jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and pour the other two fingers be avoided, for making them even.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to loosen his jawbones, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the mixture is put even, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is reset, meaning that the two jaws are assembled together, so they apply hot water and oil, until the dislocation is easily set.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not force it to return, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	and when they are returned evenly, and the mouth of the sick person is closed well with a softening, so you apply moist cloths in a rose oil and beeswax mixture, then bind it lightly with soft ties.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the sick person sleep on their back, with their shoulders between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or to the left, and do not exert themselves more, but take lightly food, until the pains are gone and the jaws are closed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then take what he wants lightly, and do not labor over opening the mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well closed and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not converted to their original state, then fevers and chills appear accustomed, and by chance vomiting appears with stool.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see that, then know it is a delusion;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many die in this condition after seven days.
de la forcelle	of the shoulder
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	the shoulder cannot be moved along the ribs inside and below the skin, and is dislocated every time without fail, and it hurts very much.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the sick man gets up from his bed and extends his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then presses the joint in the palm of his hand, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then puts on the plaster and the bandage, and ties it;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the joint that is opposite to the injured spot cannot dislocate.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	He is not so, and if he dislocates sometimes, then the reset has taken its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then put on the plaster and bandage, and bind it, instructing the patient to rest until he is healthy.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and just as before, the head of the shoulder is reset when it has lost its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated only in three manners:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	when one is dislocated due to the part being displaced downwards from its proper place.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the level of the heel;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and sometimes it dislocates upwards, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	And do not dislocate me behind by the shoulder, and do not dislocate me inside with the nerves.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and again and again dislocate in that direction towards the elbow, especially those who have little strength, because those will be hastily taken.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and to those who have enough strength, the limb will swell and return to its original size.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some people that they strike or crush the shoulder with an abscess, and think that this is a dislocation because of the swelling.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore it is necessary that you test it, until you are certain of it;
et adonques encomence la cure.	And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that there are dislocations when they occur below the elbow, and you will find a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will see their diversity clearly.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And you will find a cavity at the shoulder blade, and below that at the armpit the head of the shoulder blade, so it is when we have seen.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And the patient cannot return his hand to its normal place, nor move it from any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is dislocated above, and not hidden inside, because you will find it obviously at the armpit.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this kind of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or if the patient is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the manner is that the ministers will lift the hand of the sick person in the armpit, then put your hands under the shoulder, and lift the joint to force in the upper place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and hold the hand out high, because it is below.
si venra hastanment.	if it comes suddenly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said on the hands the day before, then it is advisable that the patient be bathed in hot water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and he gives him an appetite-lifting and pain-relieving draught, as a decoction of alum and fenugreek and malloloth in hot water, and it is given to him;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then place the patient on his back, and put an equal-sized cloth on his chest, neither too soft nor too hard, then put a towel over his shoulder, lift the head of the shoulder with virtue, and treat the hand of the patient;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and put another head on the patient, so it does not move.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	that shoulder returns now, and if you see it again in this way;
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and that you have make him be present to someone larger than the patient.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and stand straight on the cost side, and pour water from above onto the shoulder of the patient, and lift the shoulder up, so that the patient hangs by the arm;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another servant treats the hand of the patient towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the patient is too light, then he will lie with him on any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And also, it is done in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and it is as to strike a long knife into the earth, which is so that the head is like the pit, and not too big nor too small.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	The patient will lie down afterwards, but if he has soft bandages on, and the patients are lying in a long bed.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then stretch out his hand opposite the other limb, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment.
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take two fingers of the right hand and four of the left, which have the head at the center to pierce in depth beneath the nail, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then place the head of the fist under soft bandages to prevent the wound from bleeding the patient, and then put it beneath the abscess on the patient.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	Instruct the patient to stretch out both arms above the body, and tie the arm to the body, then pull the arm towards the head of the hand, next put the arm on top of an eschar of a large size, and so stretch out the hands downwards, and leave the body hanging from another part:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Let the joint be fixed now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is so in any manner, if it pleases you to do so, then put under the bandage one sparrow of wool equal, then put on the plaster mixed with powdered flour, with incense and myrrh from the bees, above all the shoulder and around; then pull out from under the bandage immediately, and turn the ligature onto the plaster, and encircle the hand at its neck, so that the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is fitting that he does not move too much, until the limbs are comfortable, for he will recover more quickly.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then move again after three or seven days, and the limb.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is firm and it does not soften, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is swollen due to moisture or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as he is placed in front of or on the cautery desk.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and he dislocates after seven days, and the joint will not stay in place, and cannot lift any arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either crushed, stretched out, or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And he knows that a joint can never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	A dislocation occurring near the elbow or kneecap, or behind it, which is caused by pushing and stretching of hands, and one uses another joint.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cure until he is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing there comes a gretez at the member, and late in movement, then use the patient many times, as long as that gretez is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	He knows that the joint of the elbow is dislocated at points, and it re-dislocates.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And it has been dislocated from all parts, and itself in front and behind, and the dislocations are not renewed, because one sees well and feels well.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick hand with the healthy one, so you can see it open.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is swollen, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary to reset it in the same way that abscesses come out, because if they were coming out, it would be a great grievousness.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And by chance, it cannot be restored to its original state, same as when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	But it is worth more than other dislocations, and there is great pain, and by chance it can lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And when restoration is possible, when they are of such extent that one can be restored, then you stretch out your hand to both hands.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the arms be spread out, and the hands be placed according to the cost of the injury, above and below, and fix the joint to its bones, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, so it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and from the root of the palm he feels the cost which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not return to its place, then perform strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	And so there are two assistants who stretch out the arm, and two assistants who tie up the arm, if it does not move with the stretching.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	Then turn the arm on each side, because you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror joins the joint to his hand, so that he applies oil to the joint, then he tightens the joint firmly, until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in the place, so he applies plaster with powdered gypsum and oil of beeswax, tightens the wound, bends the arm to the neck of the patient, and leaves it for some days, then he removes.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, so he releases the thread and leaves it;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then resume the plaster and tie it, and let it be so for some days, until it is firmly set;
puis le deslie.	and then dislodge.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if it feels pain after the movement of the joint, and it is silent, then bathe and rub well, and press so that it becomes relaxed;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or you put a fat lamb's wool on the joint, then let it be for one day and one night, then remove it, and let it go into the bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when he sweats, then rub the joint temperately, then put on the wool again, and then let it go into the bath;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and so do this two times or three, until he is healed;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see, place a poultice of hot vinegar moistened with butter on it and strain.
si revenra a sa disposition.	if he returns to his state.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The dislocation of the hand joint is easier than other joints and returns quickly.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Regardless, it is necessary to return the joint to its own place immediately, in the same wound where it was dislocated, so that it may swell or an abscess form.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And if it is corrected so that you put the diseased hand on a table, and extend the affected fingers, and put your finger in the same place as the joint, and press hard until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	It's necessary to inspect whether he is well at home;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	so put the patient's back of his hand on a table at extension and flexion.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If a dislocation is at the back of the hand, he instructs the patient to put his back on his hand over the table, and the operator puts his hand over that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	if it returns now, that is well.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then take a poultice of plaster to calm the abscess, and let him continue in that way.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put him back on his feet after some days, the joint will be crooked.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and do not put the patient through anything until his hands are fully swollen and he cannot strain or exert himself.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Then you will know that the nerves are pierced or damaged, or the arteries.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other remedy than to strain by the cautery of the case, and by chance it does not bring anything.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hands are at rest, put on the plaster that we have said, then strain and let it be in place for three days, then take it off and leave it as is.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not move well and it has no inflammation, then apply the poultice of hot water and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the wrists
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	never are the joints of the hand damaged at each point, never on the back of the palm or in the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then the joints are known, and put the dislocation in the grooves until it comes back into place, then hold the head of the joint with your fingers and direct it towards the part where it is dislocated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and let it be two days, and then put it in its original position that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and tie it up as we have said, and the dislocation of that day, and make it move, and bind it with a strap.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is tight, and just the same, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do so as you did before, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and just the same when it is dislocated on another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Due to dislocation of the shoulder skin
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the skin of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, and there is no treatment, for fear of death, the patient rushes to their grave.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are such that the excretions come forth with great violence, nor can they be held in place, and often some member is softened, or one of the two knees or both the arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times the ulcer opens into four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	the one that opens at the back is called "gibbose" or "gilbosis".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the cure is that you apply to it if the gilbose has come from childhood;
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	There is no cure nor healing for all things.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from a fall or from blows or from similar things, the old manners of cures speak with great words, where there is no great benefit.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have reduced it to its essence according to my intention, and formed remedies in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in gout at the toes there is no cure.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly in the two bones, and cannot be cured with fire unless it is applied specifically to the back, as I said.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and that the sick person is laid on their face in an equal position, and has a strain beneath them, lest they fall.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Now put the finger on the bone in the head on the ground, and on the other side the knee, and tie a string around the armpits of the sick man, and on the other side the groin and ankle.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two ministers feel the strings, one at the head and the other at the knee, between the two fingers;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well closed, the finger as we have said, and the nail meets its palm on the spine, until it turns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	and if it does not return by this remedy, take a wooden beam three fingers long, and shave the surface of it, and let the sick man lie on that side, then put the middle of the beam on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	And place the mirror on its feet above the other chest of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you see, if you do that on the tonsil which turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And that you tie two tonsils to the head of the patient on one arm, and to the feet of another, and put between each tonsil, above and below, a span's width of wood.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and that in each tonsil there is a puncture, or the tonsil bleeds, and the tonsils are firmly planted in the earth, so that they do not move;
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two tonsils there is a tonsil turning, whether the ties turn, and have in each of these turns two small tonsils a span wide, to turn the tonsil;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the tendon that is between the bones near the neck to the top of the head, and the other tendon to the feet at another turn, and each of the ministers turns their turn around the entire tendon, and the master ties the equal needle as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is equalized, he puts on a plaster dressing with many beeswax, and then the poultice, and then the edge of a tablet of three-dozen lengths, which stains the leg of goutiness and the healthy part of the spine, and then ties it with a cord as we have said, and uses the patients gently until they are healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if no remedy comes to the end of the healing, he must administer soft and soothing medicines with the edge that we have mentioned before;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And sometimes they give him a poultice, and sometimes it comes to appearance in the lower spondyle of the back, and think that this is a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	And it's the bone that opens up, because you shouldn't have any presumptions about it:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	But by chance might it bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hunchback
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Which joints of the hip and shoulder come only from dislocations, not from other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	And the joint of the hip is swollen in four parts;
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	within and without, and before and behind;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more within these joints, and less swollen before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	The knowledge of dislocations is that when you put the sick limb together with the healthy one, it becomes longer and opens up more the patient's knees than those who are healthy, and cannot double its knee joint at all in heat;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the pus that comes out of the abscessed cartilage, because the head of the cartilage comes loose.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of he who suffers from this defect are such that these accidents are contrary to those foreseen.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs that occur before a patient with this condition are that his knee is perfectly aligned according to the completion.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	unless he doubles his knee joint with pain, and if one tries to make him walk, he cannot before, and holds back his urine, and swells the groin, and when he goes, it passes above the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of he who has this behind him are such that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double it, and because that leg is more bent than the other, and the groin swells less, and the head of the chest bone is at low level beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The limb of this dislocation is when you return to its normal form if the dislocation is old and it stays in place according to its nature; if there is no cure.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it's not fitting that he has confidence.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and it's one of the four kinds of dislocation, if you hasten so that you return to the joint, and open it inside and outside, and move it from right to left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	in case he returns, and no other cure is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if he doesn't return in this manner, it's fitting that you should bring a strong minister, and fasten the leg strongly with two hands, or tie it up above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	And other attendants stretch out their hands in this manner so that they pour water over his hands and below his feet, then tie a string around the crotch.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And other tie up the head with the cord.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And stretch it up and down all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for four reasons, and if dislocation has returned, as we have said, this is very good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this is not the case, then it is advisable to apply treatment to his appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder joint, if you want to, place the patient on their healthy side, then tie the cord at the root of the crotch, and the one that is under the angle, then stretch the cord upwards towards the angle, and downwards towards the armpit.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then take another set of attendants to grasp his arms, and embrace the large limb of the sick person, and stretch it out towards the form:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot close it in this manner as we have said, then it is advisable to bind the two feet and two knees of the sick person together with a strong cloth on both the lower and upper parts, so that the diseased leg is stretched out twice more than the others;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then be hung suspended over the head of a stick, and also above the ground two arms of long cloth;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then command the attendant to embrace the head of the sick person, and let another set of attendants be hung with the patient, who will embrace and form a tight closure, because the joints are returning now quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation occurs at the joint, so that the patient suffers, just as we have said in the case of those with gout, and cut off the ligament on the diseased leg properly, and on the flesh as well;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two thorns, one on the head and one on the other joint, then drive a thorn between the bones into the patient's flesh in the shape;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and cover the moist cloth over it, so that the patient does not bleed, then stretch out those two ministers towards him, and put the ligature equal to his hand on the dislocation;
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put on an ice. I.e., a table, and press it as we have said in the gout, and grieve the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when a dislocation occurs in front, it is advisable to stretch the diseased leg very much, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and put the mirrors on the patient's face of pain, then press with the other hand, and extend away towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is outside, it does not suit to extend the patient downwards, nor lift him up onto the ground, but rather it suits that he be in the same state as if his joints had been dislocated outside, as we have said when covering the two joints;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and be on his face, and the ligament is extended as we have said before, and must not press upon the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and when the patient stretches his legs, and they are made even.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and then tie the knees, and apply an emplastre, and strap with a bandage, so that the joint does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And if he rests for three days or four, then let him be laid down; and apply plaster on.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see them growing even, then strain the skin, just as before, and let him rest for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then lay him down again, and set him to walk gently until the limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of a joint of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The groin is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inward and outward, and behind.
et ne desalue point devant.	and does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And if the sign is that you command the patient to bend his knee to his groin, and he does not straighten up at his groin, then it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and let the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his groin between your palms, and push it between your two hands, then fold the two sides of the groin together;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and other servants stretch his foot so that the groin returns to its place, and let it be a sign that he has well restored his leg with light movement;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the plaster on, and let it dry by applying heat to his leg at the groin, and binding together three days or four, then release.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not worry about the sick man until his members are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not at all moved by that, stretch them greatly, just as we said in the treatment of hemlock, so long as they remain safe.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the foot dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The feet are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely inflamed, and they swell inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it tends before it is displaced at the part where it is displaced:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The remedy is lighter, and you must extend it lightly with your hands when it is only inflamed.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, you should seat the patient on his right side, and apply gentle pressure to the joint with a linen band above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then take the stone to your right hand and then to your left twice, then stretch it upwards, and pour water well into the top of the stone.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, pouring and taking out the stone.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	She has recovered;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If this is not the case, then it will begin again, because it recurs.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot recur in that way, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a firm pad between his thighs, and tie tight cloth around, so that the patient does not bleed.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then the ministers will apply to the joint, and another minister will extend the foot to his hands or to the cord that is tied around the neck.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister extends it equally, and the cord is tied tightly between the thighs of the patient to hold them in place when being extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then put the mirror on its level at the dislocation in its hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg down below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it has come to a point, if one applies the plaster and casts on top, and the strain forms, and ties the foot to the leg, and binds the nerves that are above the ankle bone so that the ligaments are not too tight;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then he lets it be for two days or three, and if the strain occurs;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then he frees him on the third day or in the fourth, and sends him away after four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes before the appointed time, it is not safety for him; he will dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to a head, so you must calm it, just as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of the two.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both are dislocated, so they must be extended with work, and it is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	If the dislocation is in any other position on the back or foot, then you should seat the patient upright either on a plain floor or on a bed, and place your foot under where these joints are located, then press with your foot firmly, until they come back.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	And when it is even and nothing opens, then you should place under the sole of the foot a wooden board with two joints, then fix them firmly, and leave three days, then lift.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let him rest, until he is cured.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound occurs with the dislocation and one attempts to restore it, this often happens that the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, for if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitying or merciful and delaying unnecessarily, do not be too harsh.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and instruct the patient to begin with soothing treatments for an abscess, and let him lie in the hands of God, if you do not see a chance of recovery.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and if you see a chance of recovery, then reset the limb immediately, so that the abscess is cleansed.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and if the limb is in place, administer soothing treatments for an abscess, and treat the wound as needed, using dried bandages.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a fracture with broken bones and small pieces of bone that must be extracted, do as we have said for simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and beware not to fall into a state of fear, as I have said, for this is what your Creator has warned you against, and because it will lead to more suffering according to your own arm and body.
