O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O ye, dear sons, I have completed this book which is behind the knowledge of medicine assembled in its completion, and have made the end for his explanations and by his declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I will complete this book for you, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forced in our region and is strange everywhere throughout all things, so has perished the knowledge and was forgotten, and remains only from the fires that were burned only the small descriptions in books of the ancients who had used their hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this is come the errors and the foolishness, and are closed the intentions and are delayed the knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I can revive this text according to the order of this treatment following the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and came together with the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of the work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of it, such as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our times, the art of medicine is stretched out.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is fitting for him who enters this that he will have to delve into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the joint of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and joints and the number of bones, and the movement and rest of the veins, and of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hippocrates says that the nose is very sensitive, and the ear is less so; and it is the same in the art of skill.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	And therefore, in the introduction of this book, I want to say that he who is not well acquainted with these things should beware lest he fall into error and hurt people; thus I have often seen more of those who intervene in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a mad doctor who cut the abscess of a woman with scrofula or a lump on her neck, and cut at the arteries in the neck; because so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I have also seen another doctor who treated a large stone from an old man, and the stone was so big that he removed a piece of his bladder with it; and died three days later in his own home.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have heard that it is called cauterization, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the wound, and I know well that if you cut like this, he will die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another physician who treated a duke of our land, who had a broken leg and an open wound; and the foolish physician stretched the break on the wound with force, binding it tightly, without letting it heal, and thus he finished his cure, and the patient commanded that he should not release him again; and so he stayed like this until the leg was completely frozen, and the feet and came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to release the leg; and when I heard it was dislocated, it was in peace and he did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it cannot be cured; and the corruption does not cease to spread through the member until the member is completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there is another evil that crushes and inflames the abscess, then sets it on fire by the malice of its power.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humors, does not require that one touches it with iron unless there is a need to remove the corrupted part.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And dear son, it is necessary for you to know that surgical work is divided into two divisions: first, knowing whether there is a risk in many situations; and I will show you in each book of this work where there is fear and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez,
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Don't try to treat evil sickness, lest you are called a fool's physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatment according to the three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and cold medicine treatments, and they order the head up to the feet; and the shapes of the ointments, and the tools for cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and ventouses, wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters order these and the shapes of the ointments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it orders the head up to the feet, and the shapes of the ointments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So that we remember the work, it is necessary to tell the quality of aid and the danger of each kind.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and the danger is the longest word and subtle science and the secret responses; and those who are wise men speak about this, and agree with it; and they give little attention to my words, because I am too long-winded.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery provides relief universally for all kinds of flesh or matter, whether it is one type of flesh: I mean the hot flesh with matter, and the dry flesh with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry flesh together with matter, some considered that cautery was great aid, and the others said the opposite: that cautery is of no use for sicknesses that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated with hot disease by heat, or drying; but tell those who say the cautery does great harm to hot and dry diseases that it brings great relief to diseases of the body in men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you buy the body of an ox and its moisture is in harmony with the nature of fire, you find that the body is frozen.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And no way should be entered into fire except for one who has proved it by experience, and who knows from long use the cautery of cutting, and the variety of human complexities, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and remedies, and space of time; while for other complexions we have no great fear, nor ourselves in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians will assemble and agree on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that cautery is gathering fire from the secrets of remedies, and is more beneficial than cautery with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Because fire is simple, and comes only from the member that is burned, and does not harm other members if not called upon.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines come from one member to another through displacement, and bring disease of grief or of recovery; and by chance the fire kills the sick person because of their high heat and because of the kindness of its nature does not do that, if it has excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have found by experiment and through long service and study, which I have put into the art, and has been known from a long time ago; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of my words, because it does not please me to show you the secret that is answered with fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher said, demonstrating it; so receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they will agree on when these cauteries are to be made, and have chosen the prayers.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable in all times, because the evils that remain underneath are removed by the aid of cautery; and even though the cauteries cause painful necessities that cannot be put off until greater evil comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think that it is the same thing, my dear son, as how they speak; for the disease which is healed by cautery has no return; and he says thus; but it's not so, because cautery is not just a medicine that cures, but one that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors that are causing pain, and it heals more than other medicines due to its haste of action, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	In case some disease occurs without ever matching the patient's complexion and the nature of the disease, and all excesses are assembled in them through the acquisition of meat and similar things, so if they do not administer cautery to him when he has little excess and moisture, just as cauterization for pain and similar things works, but this happens rarely; yet it often occurs.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the art of medicine, and it's seeing; but they don't believe that cauterization has value after medicine, their opinions are false, and cauterization is considered the art of medicine because when we administer various types of cures in any disease and they don't work, then we administer cauterization and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then open well what cauterizes is from the medicine, not according to the foolish views of the mad.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterizing with an instrument of gold is more precious than iron, and they did not say that fire was used only for the quality of the gold and its highness; and they said that the cauterizing instruments do not rot, but this is not true because I have tried it, and I have found that it is true in some people; and cauterizing with gold is more precious than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And if you cauterize an instrument of gold, you do not know well when it is caused by the color of the gold, and when it cools down quickly; and if one heats it too much, they make it in the fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cautery, which we have tried before in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or we have ordered this chapter to be written on the head since it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	How to perform olive oil cautery.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is worth the moisture and coldness on the head, and for one disease called "soda", which occurs because of an imbalance of humors that discharge from the brain to the eyes, ears, and head, as well as numerous dreams, pain in the teeth, pain in the throat, and similar diseases, just like paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and other similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine to dissolve and clean out the brain, if it is obstructed with pus or four humors, according to what the virtues, juice, and custom of the patient can tolerate; and then apply the cauterized head to the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then the finger shall be placed between your hands, and held by one hand on his palm; after putting the root of your palm upon the root of his nail between his two fingers; and when it comes to your middle, if it bleeds at that place, take the cautery called "olivare" for this purpose.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then put a small signet ring of ink on the skin, and make downward cuts and extractions with your hand little by little in turning; then lift your hand gently, and treat the wound so that you see a bone exposed small; if you do not see it, repeatedly apply the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after take some wool, and put it on with oil and soft cotton inside, and place it on the skin, and let it stay for three days; after cover it with a moist linen cloth in butter; and leave it so that the bleeding is stopped; after cure the wound of the ligament called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if the ancient ones said, when a wound stays open for longer, it is more purged. And therefore one should aid muscles.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one must so cool the cautery that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what has been burned with the bone, and cure it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they said the other, one must cool the cautery so much that you put it as far down as a bone as big as a green thorn, which women use to make their breasts tight, for this reason the humors come out in motion; and then one cools the wound long. After, one must cure and sew it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in all respects, fires that give some men a sight of fear; and it seems to me I should leave them, for the joints are weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we have shown in other members; and myself when the joints of the patient are weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more healing and moistening for me, that's why I use over it in some cases, therefore this seems a cure.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient head pain
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in the head there is chronic pain that lasts for a long time, and to alleviate it, the patient must use the powder and pills called "coccie", and purgatives of the head, oils, and plasters; and if you apply the cautery we have mentioned before, and it has no effect.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that if the patient's joints are of strong nature, and not too cold; then apply the cautery under that same cautery as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After applying the cautery to both corners of the head where the bone is, just as we have said, and doing the cautery that is called "vasselz", which is used with forceps; and take care not to see with your hand where the bone is: the patient feels a greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the corns be applied more subtly than those for cauterizing the middle part of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	the fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When there is sudden pain in one part of the head, and the disease has spread up to the bone, and the joints are purged with medicines, and other treatments have been tried, as I mentioned in the division of diseases, but they do not help: then he should perform cautery according to two methods, namely with cold medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with cold medicine is that you take an ounce of alum, and remove the scab and the covering skin over the two joints, and then make a poultice on the temple in such a way that you can put the alum under the skin; and when it has been placed so that the lie (a type of plaster) holds well, he tightens and restrains it well and leaves it like this for 12 hours; and then removes it and treats with hot alum again, leaving the wound like two or three days; then puts on a cotton poultice in lard until it is cured.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until it is healthy; and if you see, then do what I wrote about certain burning medicines that I have written or dosed to treat burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cauterization is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterization so that it has this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the chief is shaped like a close or has a little bit of wood, and in the middle it has a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand tight and turn the iron gently, until the moist part of the spice is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is before, and discharge abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After metting cotton on the wound of the vein, and puts sor on the leg for III days; then he puts cotton soaked in butter, and then heals the leg with ointment until it is sound; and if you want to cauterize this emigraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at all the point, and keep off the artery in this emigraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure headache as we have said before in the division of diseases, and it does not profit, and you see that those who use cautery before say of medicine and iron do not suffer, then it is necessary to heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and so apply a hot bandage on the leg with half a double strand of linen, and hold your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and that it does not come near the bone; and beware of the jaw that swells when one eats, and the nerves will have no sight but the numbness and the spasm will come to the sick, and beware of the corruption of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and itself to that which does not fit, and who is not examined and tried; and leave the open wound in my way; but I will tell you how one preserves health when the artery is cut, and I will show you to him in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If the fire cautery does not ease the illness and the patient suffers, cauterize the wound in the same way as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cauterization which has two stitches; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from the pain of the ears due to coldness.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the pain in the ear comes from coldness and we have applied medicinal solutes and other treatments that we have said on division, and the pains do not cease, then apply this cauterization which is called "pins", for it has the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After poking all around the diseased ear, or on both ears where pain holds firm, and then pushing a little towards the root of the ear after marking the level with an awl; and applying X points around each ear; after treatment, make it healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torment that must be cured by cautery is only of those that are caused by pus, just as we have said in our divisions of the disease; and do not perform any cautery on superficial symptoms which come from ulcers and phlegm.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this superficial torment that is caused by pus and dries and purging of the head and gargrene, and it is not worth anything, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another near the temple, and the third between the two lips; and insert the cauterium into the healthy part that opens up, and do the cauterization directly on top of the ear above a little below the nail of the head, and another one as long as the space of a finger in the temple; and leave the cauterium there until the blood cools. And this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the resemblance of the sawing cut that we have shown before, but it is a bit more subtle and should be the cuts a bit larger; after care, let him heal as I have said, until he is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it in this way, but he does not get better, and the patient has no fever, then do four cauterizations: two on each of the two horns of the head, and one on the forehead, and one on the limb called "vasselz" as we have said before, and a cautery on the belly below the stomach; treat it in this way as we have said.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is fitting to give the patient large and pill-like substances for the brain; after that, let him take the head of the patient with all his ailments, and place the emplastre of sinapis on the occipital bone, which is written in the treatment of emplastres; and this is the way of cautery: if he does so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus healthy, good is the state of the body and of the soul; and if not, three cauteries should be done to the extremities in the lower part near the neck, with a distance of one space between each cautery two of great size; and the cure as for others, and if you see it worsen, then let him have one cautery in the middle; and if it is skilled, then two other ones above the two horns, and the cure so long as he becomes healthy; and let those cauteries be called "olivare", just as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and of what we have said before; after taking away the pus from the patient, then do cautery to the extremities of the head and on each horn, and two lower and three above the neck spine; and if you think it needs more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease is severe, then do four cauteries above the neck spine; and let him remain until his pain subsides, and lift your hand; after the cure as long as he becomes healthy, and let be those cauteries called "olivare" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epilepsy physicians should use fire cautery only on those who are spongy, and it is advisable first to moisten the brain with years and other remedies that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffers from a great amount of painful medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, then let him do gargling and mastication moistening the brain often with bones meat; after letting him eat broth, and then he does fire cautery according to what we have said before, and he does fire cautery on the neck, and on each horn; and if the patient is violent and suffers greatly, then he does cauteries so as I have said to that who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine at the back and in the neck, and let him do oil cautery according to the manner I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is sick, then if he does fire cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When because of melancholy there are fluxes or moist spots corrupted and thick pus, then the fire cautery on affected parts as we have said to those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if because of melancholy the fluxes decline to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give drink for what reason the brains may be purified, according to what has been said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the patient is treated; after making the linen strip well made, like a circle, if you tie it to the head; and let the patient lie crosswise, and let them be held tight all over; afterwards present the linen, and apply ointment made from boiled butter of old sheep; and place the hot cloth on temperately so that it may not cause pain; after emptying the circle by tying it around the head, and letting it cool; and make this for each patient once a week with another good regimen, until they are cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see someone being cautered while performing multiple pricks on the entire surface.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery makes the brain more swollen; and then applies wet cotton in butter and pig fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye comes first due to the signs I have said in the division, then start and do immediately give the patient a bitter medicine, cleansing the head from all moisture, and making it sweat or take a bath several times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands him to look up his head, and makes cautery on the inside of the head, and makes two more cauteries on both temples, if there is any weakness in both eyes together, or if one is weak in one; and strike all the veins and arteries under the wound, and make the cautery long according to the width of the temple; and beware of blood discharge, and if you see too much blood coming out, then bind with a strong poultice as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incising caution how to do it, and never at any time perform cautery or heat treatment below the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the eye.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the eyes are old and accustomed and have veins on them, or arteries that appear to be in front of the forehead; and if one sees that it's an accumulation of cold, moist, inflammatory matter, then do the cautery as I said at the beginning: cut off the top of the head, and cauterize each temple, and cauterize below each bone; and if necessary, more, cauterize with a sharp point under the eyebrow.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	In the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you administer the medicine as we have discussed in division, and it does not benefit the patient, then give to him three bitter medicines; after the king, and cut out the liver with fire, and do two cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" above the two sores, one below the cheek; and beware of the artery that you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then apply the cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	Because this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	If you see such a burn, do II cauteries on the II wounds as well, long as the wound is; and don’t let go of your hand only until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I’ve said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Of a single hair that points at the bone
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There is no instance where the hairs of the bone are converted to flesh, and prick the bone, and then one does cauteries according to two manners: that is to say by fire, or with hot medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their birth, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a safe location; after that, put on paper over the eyes a figure like the shape of the mirror's smoke, and the beginning of the sign from the hairs; then put cotton moistened in wax and musk-like odor on oil, then take out the cautery according to this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked little by little many times, and the edges are slightly heated; and the signs of the work's health is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs lifted to the oil tip; then lift your hand, and let it be so for three days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the cauterization is removed; after the ointment treatment until the patient is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz,
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine has been paid to you.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the swelling has passed, if you lift the limb, and repair it so that you see the paper lifted as it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this is not so, then apply again the medicine to the limb or let it be inoperative until your wounds are even, and your eyes are fixed; then put on cotton soaked in butter until the wounds close up, after applying an ointment called "dyafenis" and other remedies, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to guard well your wound by great care so that the medicine does not touch your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	If the paper becomes damp after, and the hair pricks in oil, then resume the medicine on that person who is softened by the pure paper, just as you did before; after the cure until he is healed; and this is the form of the fire cauterization.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men differ in size and shape, and according to those, your constraints; and do not be returned to the right path for one who has the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure for fistula by cauterization.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures are not profitable, then it is necessary that you cauterize them according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in a safe place; and tie the menisters (his hair) between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor do you make him's head move. After, put cotton wool moistened with vinegar or persille juice on the oil; after this, heat the cautery which is tied to it like the shape of a quill feather, so that they are assembled together; if you see it (the cautery), it should be applied from one head to another; and if you see it, it should be done as well as a tent. But whatever happens, this is what is worth seeing for your sake.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula and if it opens, take out the pus, and clean it; and if it closes, apply more oil; after that, put the hot cautery in the shape, and hold your hand on the cautery at the place of the wound from behind the ear, so as not to make a fool of yourself; and put the cautery into the fat of the oil, and let it corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just before the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If it is not done again just once, and you need to do it again, and you let it happen for three days, after that put cotton soaked in butter on the wound, and apply a drying ointment until the patient is healed, and if 40 days pass without healing, then put an acid medicine corrosive until the bone is uncovered; and the price according to what he will come to his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And I have one way of treating an abscess that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Make sense of the abscess, and make an incision in it; after that put in the wound a thin thread of beeswax of which this is the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	Instruct to take the quantity of 3.6 ounces of powder; and hold your hand firmly over the cauterized area, so that the patient does not move at all, until the powder is melted and falls into their oil; it is necessary to put on the oil a warm cloth, soaked in wine or ashes: the powder will heal the fistula, and save the healthy person from marvelous sickness.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	But if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have said, then it's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If it's not so, then it is necessary to administer poultices on the wound, and bring the fistula back into its proper place in the body according to what is most suitable for each person individually.
des crevaices en levres	of fissures in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there are cracks in the lips called "poil", and similarly in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you are treating these cracks as we have said in division, and the cure does not benefit, then apply a small cautery with a spoon-like instrument according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply it immediately to those cracks until it is fully closed; then, after cleaning with lard, so that the wounds are healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or under the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of teeth, after making it rotten and running and becoming inflamed and developing a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit: then it is necessary to apply cautery according to the size of the fistula; after removing or draining the fistula, hold your hand until the iron nail comes to the root of the nail, and make sure you take care around the area. Then do this once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it heals so, that's good; but if not, then it is necessary to discover the root and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The joint has moved out of its place
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat with medicines but it does not help, then put the head of the sick person on a clean cloth; after applying the cautery which will come from there in this manner that you place a string around the tooth; and put hot cauterization inside hastily, and hold your hand so the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand and continuing the cautery according to your desire; after filling the patient's mouth with vinegar and salting it for an hour and keeping warm fires.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the teeth that were moving are fixed, and the gums are restrained, and the moistures are corrupted and dried.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain of the teeth comes from cold, or there is cold in the ear, and medicines do not help, then it is necessary to cut according to two ways: and fire cautery and butter cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery if is such that you apply butter of wool, and the end in a iron or iron tongs; after taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent, and the pus in butter boils, and puts on the painful tooth hastily and holds until it cools; and so does this many times until its virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that wool and cotton in butter burn, and puts on the tooth bleeding, and puts on iron hot until the heat comes to the tip of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Instruct the patient to hold a burning cautery, such that you grasp a iron or hemp chain, and it is thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, because its form will come later, put it on the tooth and hold your hand until it cools down; do this often, because the pain will be removed the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is fitting that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of applying this cautery, and then they rush to heat it up; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery of whatever thickness you like, and according to your power; and this is the form of the chain:
des scrophules	Warts
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When warts are swollen and moist, cold, and not subject to digestion by medicines, then apply the cautery to the hair because it follows this form afterwards, and make incisions for the humors to come out from the cautery on the other side; and put the cautery hot above the abscess once, or as soon as it serves them, until the abscess comes to a boil; if the abscess is small, apply cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it so for three days; and put cotton soaked in butter on top until the swelling goes away; after treatment, allow the patient to use ointments and poultices until they are healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cauterized area.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistors (moisture) win over the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be voided first by medicines soluble; after applying fire cautery to the root of the throat, and beware so that you do not come near the throat again, and do not burn with heat but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying fire cautery to the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and apply cautery to what is called "the claw" (clavicle), because it has this shape, treat as we have said before until it is safe.
de la toust	From the throat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the sickness of the pimple is due to cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or scorch, and the disease is old, then apply two fire cauteries on the skin in its veins; and another fire cautery between the two nipples; and apply cautery according to what we have said before, which is called "the claw" because of the shape.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	If you see it, do fire cautery by pricking at the total cautery that is called "points" because of this form being before in the illness of the ears; and be the points just a thousand or more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After healing the wound according to what is said before, and if the cauterizations are three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauterizations are lighter, because you do three at one time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder joint.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Instruct the patient to lie on their back and on their chest; after take care of the cut that is inside the fistula (with two fingers from your left hand); and if the joint is dislocated, apply the cautery (fire tool) which has the form of II ners douqueil (I don't know what "II" refers to here as it was probably some sort of abbreviation).
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the cut so that it pierces just to the side of the chest, and comes with the figure of the cautery which is made of III ners (I don't know what "III" refers to here as it was probably some sort of abbreviation); for this is done with a cautery having III ners (same issue as before) because the figures of cauterization are these three cauteries; and they have nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, which is the form of the cautery having III ners:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes they press against this nerve because there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting the cautery on the raw flesh with a cord; after putting him to rest, and not letting the limbs lie for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if he is dislocated, such a thing often happens little by little, therefore do cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed, and the moisture and the bone are healed, and the patient is cured.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When colds and much moisture enter the stomach, such that he extracts them to his complexion, and many catarrhes appear to him, and in the usual treatments he does not profit, therefore it is necessary that the patient be covered on his back, and stretch his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	In the aftermath of this fire cautery, make III cauteries I below the nail of the finger by the quantity of two measures, to all cauteries clavicle, and II cauteries before the II sides so that the figure of the cauteries is at III angles, and has a space between them as long as they do not come together when they get dry; and so that the cauteries be done so that they prick the II parts of blood, and the figure of the cauteries according to this shape until touching.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see someone being cut with a large cautery in the stomach according to this shape; and if he has fear of this cautery, cut at the point of the sting and sign above the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you see from the needle; then cut all the way around what is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the treatment we had before, until it is safe.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	As to the liver, when it has pain from frost and moisture and great swelling, so that it is forced out of its natural shape due to the accumulation of superfluities; and patients are cured with what we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit them, if the patient must be shaved over his hairy area; and sign of performing three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, excluding hypochondriacs, at the place where the pain is located; and there should be space between each cautery the thickness of a dole; and let the cauteries be long in body length, and not press hard with your hand all over the cautery; and burn only the moist parts of the heat, and make the patient stand upright on his feet; and if he cannot, so that he may lean, and extend his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you wish it so be done, cauterize these cauteries with the cutlery, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn your entire flesh, for you will dry out all the body; and if it happens before I burn, because the blood is very subtle at the point, and you know how to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you see if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain that is not very strong; but if it is in the membrane, he feels sharp and severe pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment should extract pus, it is fitting that the patient be seated on his head; and then gently remove the pus where it is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a knife, for this is its shape.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	Instruct the patient to cauterize until the hairs are dry, and it has just begun to be sucked out, so that the wound is completely healed; after the treatment as per the treatment of wounds, until he is cured; and it is not advisable to use any fire from this cautery on anyone who has studied long in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have been cured at some time.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	And therefore he can be strongly applied to, and it seems to me that you should leave him.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the cautery of pleurisy.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for pleurisy you must perform cauterization with roots of Aristolochia, in this manner: take a long root of Aristolochia, the largest you can find, and make it dry, and just as thick and as long as your thumbs; and apply olive oil to it, and press it into fire, and cautery between the navel and the neck, and two pokes down from the chin; between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining towards a little; one cauterizes on the hip, and another above the stomach, and between two shoulders, and two along the lower ribs on either side of the cautery between two shoulders; and do not press with your hand, but make it as open as in the odorant.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they said an old man that no one uses cautery of fire like the razor, and the flint and put it between the ribs, until it comes to that place; and the fire burns the pain, as we have said in the passage about the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patients are dying now, or a fistula comes that cannot be cured.
de la mice	of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the mouse disease of those who we have said have different treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways of cautery that all are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	There are two ways of cautery: one is that you do three cauteries, or four, linking them according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver which we have said before; and do not hurry at all with the cautery, and let the patient suffer on his back; and another way of cautery is that you fire the cautery that has two nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the wound that is right over the mouse, or the cost comes to the left side, and so lift the wound according to the wound, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After the II nerves are inflamed, fire them so that they become perceivable from the other side, and then apply fire to the cautery, and thus in four there will be. And if you see, cauterize with the entire cautery for three times.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when they have gotten dirty for long time, and this is what it means that the other treatments I mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not useful for dropsy, except when done in the way called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure according to the ways we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries inside the swollen area, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the groin, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the lower part of the leg; and let the cauteries be very close to the affected spot.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Instruct the patient to leave the fire cautery open for a long time until it is full of pus, and do not finish the cure on the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two humors will conjoin with God's aid.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery on the abdomen is a nail that we have shown before, and this olive oil on the back, according to what has been placed there previously.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in a person who is dropsical and filled with blood citron, it is necessary to cautery on the back of the foot between the auricular and ankle joint, and lift your hand with the cautery as you turn.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply into it, as this would cause the blood to be wasted like burning one in fire, and so let the cautery be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing this twice, for each leg make two cauteries at the point of the blade; and let one cautery be long in front of the knee and another behind it on the leg, so that they may stay long enough to heal before proceeding with the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the wound
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When an inflammation of the belly comes on from cold and moisture, so that the virtues retaining and digesting which are in the stomach and intestines are dried up, and cannot be cured by any treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great swelling, then do a large cautery on the abdomen according to what he has spoken of before or the cautery for the abdomen, after that make four cauteries beneath the small intestine subtle and all over, and two cauteries on the groin.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, instruct the patient to perform cauterization on the nail, and cauterize each finger, and ask for cauterizations on the stomach under the great pain, because the cure is beneficial when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are found at the fundament or one or more of them and are old and large with frozen and corrupted cold moist humors, treat as we have said in divisions, but if you do cauterizations: III on the spine behind the back, where it is all turned away from the almequade, point by point in triangles, and I on the buttocks II; and if you think that its stomach is cooled down and meat does not cook, and a face swells up, then grant a cauterization on the stomach, as has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mice in all directions with clavicle cauterizations; and let the cauterization remain for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After a cure, let him so that he becomes healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "theleul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the flesh (theleul), if it seems like a knife is cutting through it, and then put everything on fire in that place cut by the knife, and let your hand be enough so that the cautery comes to the navel of the woman, for this will not cut; do this once or twice, and if there is much flesh (theleul) there, cauterize each part as we have said; after cure with bandages, profit from ointments until they are healthy, and if you cauterize a great cautery on the catim (i.e. the groin), it will give more aid.
de plaie mal curee	of badly treated wounds
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear torture or opening, which we will tell in his own words, if it comes to this illness that cannot be cured except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	As for a fistula, and being old and rotten with pus and moist corruption, if you gently probe the whole thing, and keep in mind that you know how deep it is.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After applying the cautery that seems like a razor, and pouring it into the fistula according to the quantity that the instrument has entered, and repeating the cautery until the corrupted flesh is burned off once, twice, or three times, according to the extent of the wound; and take care not to burn the nerve that are involved, and great pains.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	In case the fistula remains in the body of the intestine and in the intestine, watch out for these signs, and do not perform this fire treatment unless on a charcoal bough, and think that it is not pure; after healing, keep him so long as he is healthy, and if the signs indicate that he is still sickly, and the substances are ossified for a long time, then know that he has become entirely healthy; and if the substances are not ossified, know that he is rotten, and the bone is corrupted in the form; and so as one of these we will tell you on your behalf.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of the kidney comes with great vomiting, and there is no relief from women, then it is necessary to perform cautery on both kidneys, one part on top of the other, at the cautery chisel that we have previously mentioned; and if they cauterize in the middle, so will require three cauteries in line, and will give more relief.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and soft from injury and moisture, if the patient holds urine in, then he should do a fire cautery on the part that is facing upwards on the bladder, where the hair starts at the root, and both left and right sides, so each one does it long as one finger's breadth; and he makes them cauterize behind the back, where they are needed; and so, make the cauterizations in the shape before said.
de la marris	of the uterus
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the uterus is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, so it causes great pain: therefore it is fitting that one cauterizes inside the womb, just as we have said for the bladder cautery, and also cauterize behind the back; and make them cauterize in the shape as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the groin
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the moist viscous substances descend to the groin, and because of this he is unable to move, and it is found that his crotch is longer than the other when measured together; and it is discovered that there are many swellings in the departement (of the crotch) as a result, so it is fitting that you cauterize the patient under the groin at a cautery similar to a circle, and sign the line around the groin as it turns, so that the groin may be within the circle; and if it has been cauterized in such a way as when one cauterizes the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, then he makes three cauteries of the large olive tree, and they are cauterized as deep as all the others; and the physician until he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the groin
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the groin, and it is caused by coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured according to what we said in division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of heavy humors, or fetid pills, or other hard pills that resemble them.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After you cut [the patient], and the method of cutting is according to two manners: that is to say, assembling hot medicines, and cautery with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Cautery with fire is according to many manners: of which some are such that you cut [the patient] as follows: you cauterize on the groin three times, and you cut according to this form, and make a deep and narrow cut, and leave space between each cut equal to twice the thickness of two fingers, and it should be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery at the midpoint above the head of the groin, because there are four such manners:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	If you see, such as the fire cautery on the cauterized area that we have before mentioned in the dislocation of the hamstring; but do it in a manner that the circle contains the entire hamstring, and all the flesh around the wound be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that's the way to do it in sciatique, when the pain is in the hamstring and does not reach as far as the thigh or as far as the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes as far as the thigh and the leg, he makes two more cauterizations on the place where the patient says the pain is, and four cauterizations above the ankle, to the left side one point; and whether it's a cutlery cauterization or sear of the thick flesh; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two feet or nearly to his foot, he should cauterize where he feels the pain three points or four at the cauterization which is called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the skill is present, if he makes more; and if he knows that the pain will be below the knee towards the thigh, he does fire cautery with a cutlass or circular cautery, and keeps well guard in all his cauteries so that you do not make the cautery too hot as to burn the nerves and great arteries, and you do not cause more annoyance and contraction for the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen others who did fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the leg was completely swollen, and also the toes, and it became infected and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a cauterization of the belly where he had the death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in both sides together, do cauterize in one and in the other, as this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	Instruct the wise ones in the cautery of hawthorn, for this is the manner, make such a nail and let it be as big as our sailor's thumb or a little less, and let it be set apart by equal intervals so that there are spaces like the length of an apple seed; and let the intervals be four times as long as one another, and let them be like nuts, and have a well-made iron nail; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it so that it is completely red and smells of pitch, and then place it on the hawthorn stump of the sick person, and turn it towards their healthy side; cut once with the cautery and let them recover for three days; after, apply a poultice of butter and leave the wound uncovered for a long time until they are healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use little of this cauterization because of the fear of its effects, and if you see few who use it; for all see are good cautersies, which can be endured.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauterization of medicine burns if you make an instrument between crosswise in what descends from the edge of the opening, and is made of iron or of iron long and thin, and two nails, and has one on each side, and its length equals that of a half-dog; and so do not cut short and do not cut off, but join them together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After place the flint on the patient lying on his side with his costlet unclean, and press your hand very much on the flint of the hawthorn; afterwards pour between the two circles of hot water which is heated in a little fire, and let him rest for an hour by ten, and suffer the pain and the burning of him.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the mordication of teeth, just like cautery; and when the mordication has not passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the cheek from its soft flesh, and leave it for three days, and put on butter until the bone in the socket is extracted; and let him leave three days before the swelling disappears; and this would be the hindmost aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread just to the thigh or just to the leg, make the same instrument as you did in the cheek for a longer time; and this is the method of the hot cloth, which I have written about in treating with medication.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take lime and calx vivus, as much of each as you have, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	If there is no small opening to avoid, so that the point of a needle can enter; and place over the other pot with good fat, and put on calx and chalk and sweet oil upon it, as long as you have two fingers over the powder when you will take it firmly in your hand; and leave it thus until it comes out with blood and cheese or fat, then take all that, and put on chalk and on calx so.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And when it is much swollen and is treated with the movement of other medical works and cauteries of other members, for they make all that fire work, and with other medicines where one cauterizes well the neck thus as with cauterization and honey acacia and chalk with soap, all these things are mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And the Gaians tell us of a cure for one man who was cured of the pain in his groin and sciatic nerve, and he had great praise, and said that no other cure was needed, and that he became whole again only once when this cure was performed, and he bathed as he taught it after this.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And in another way, he says to take a green and fresh gallwort, and pound it much with a little fat, and put it on the groin and thigh and leg where the pain lies, and bind; and let him for three hours, by the quantity that the patient does not feel the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then he puts him in the bath until his body is a little moistened, and he puts him to bed, and the pain will go away altogether and will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And instructs you that no one should use fire cautery on such a medicine unless it has been evacuated from the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dicyscorides says that when the sciatic vein is treated with horsehair cord, if it helps a great deal, and must be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and anoint with old oil, and place it on the crevice between the little toe and the other one called the fossicle.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking horsehair cloth dry, and wrapping it around the object so that it is charred with fire, until it is stained, then put linen on it, and let it be in that state until it stains; and repeat again in the same way, and do not cease to do so until you think by sense that it has come just up to the joint, and that the pain is ceased; and this manner of fire treatment is called "cautere of horsehair".
de la dolor dou dos	of the shoulder pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or from falling or percussion, or by excessive bleeding, or because of the spreading out of cold matter, none of these things are worth cautery, except for those who come from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patients be void of fetid pills or other similar things on their back, as long as the pain lies there, three lines marked with "enchel", and in each line, perform cautery or more according to virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and let the cautery be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, do III cauteries or IV at the clavicle midpoint according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness comes often to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a narrow spine when they lift up, and fear; and you find in the lower back in the spine on their back and in this appearance which comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it being cured, if you cauterize with the cautery of a cell according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cauterization turns purple in each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if cauterizing inside the spine with the cauterizing needle in two or three lines, and they are pointing to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the cure, let it be so that he is restored to health according to what we have said, and guard so as not to administer cauterization in swelling which is in the grasp of nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of joints are swollen in each member of the body, and when pain comes on to the foot, they call it "podagre" exactly, and when it's caused by cold and medicines can't cure it, then it is cured with cautery in this way: make a mound of cautery around the joint of the foot, and use olive oil according to this shape:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a sore that you prick on the face of the foot, make a cautery all around the point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this often happens, make a cautery on each knee three cauteries or four of each part, all around the olive oil cautery; and if you need more, make more, but don't hold your hand too hot until the spasm of the knee is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains come down just to the knees and back, serve the fire cautery that we have said in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, so that they become swollen for two lines; and if there is no pain after that, apply pressure on each joint and on each finger; and if pains come from the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good treatment to the patient and prescribe medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	But if you give good treatment and purge the humors, he will be saved by God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the surgical incision of the abscess.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When an abscess comes to the armpit, and the swellings descend to the joints and it is new, it is fitting that when you cure his eyes, he should not use those remedies the next day; and he should use things that calm the belly, so that the fever descends from his belly. After this, have him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to pull out his arm until the swellings are reduced, and then tie it up with your hands, and observe carefully to see if there is a sign similar to half of a circle above the bone of the elbow; then take the cautery in its shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	So long as he is white and his senses are clear.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then tie the bowels to their place; and have the attendants apply pressure with their hands so they do not return immediately; work well on the patient's knees and put over them stockings and servants, and another on the legs that hold back the hands; then put the cautery on the marked sign with all your force, your right hand and your left as long as you pierce into the bone, and if you miss it the first time, do so again until you get to the bone; and be careful not to let the bowels escape while you are doing this cautery; lest you burn them; and in this way, the patients will not die from another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	Instruct the cauters to be subtle according to each person's measure; and for children also as much as they are able; after three days of cure with butter cautery until the scab falls off; after the treatment of other ointments until the patient is healed, and apply warmth to the patient for forty days on their back until the wound is well closed; and it is advisable that their hair be washed long enough so that the boils do not burst when they come out to go to chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, dress him with a well-made bandage, and pour it on for another forty days; let him have good rest, that he may work little and guard against excessive drinking and eating, and from drinking too much; and if he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the operation on the abdomen.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When other incisions come in the belly and are known, and you see that they do not grow again, then apply to them according to their quantity, and burn out one third of the heat; after the cure as we have said; and none of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized at three angles according to this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the spot of the incision and make a line above it to indicate its width; and then with your own hand, bind tight all around the cauterized part.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first incisions are lighter and more tender.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	From old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any member, or from a fall or an injury, and the pain lingers for a long time, and medicine cures are not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize with the "pins" cautery, and do the cauterizations according to the length of the member, its smallness, and its weakness, and its virtue, and its location of twists and of pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If there is safety from the first cautery, that is well; but if this term does not serve, repeat another cautery on that same place, because it is a custom to let it move towards the nearest member, so that you make cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Of poor workmanship
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The problem is not cured by cautery with great help, and the disease that comes from the rotting of swine and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	You can see the cauterizer, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it's cured according to what we have said in division, and do not cut or stay, and you doubt that the corruption will infect the entire patient, so make cautery on the head: I make a new cut on the head, and another towards the front of the ears; two above the two horns, and one behind the nail; and leave your hand there until the cautery comes to bone, and until the scabs come out so much that the vapors of the large humors can come out; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the ulcer is spread all over; and it manifests itself, so you should cauterize with these cauterizations that we have mentioned earlier on the head, and in some of the nails, and two cauterizations above the spine of the neck, and six above the spine of the back, and one on the crupel, and one on the other flesh, and two on the shoulders, and two on the loins, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the fosses of the hands; and you must guard against the ners that are above the skin burning, so they do not burn; and never cauterize on the bone of the finger, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that when you do more cauterization, the patient receives more benefit, and the pain increases; and know that the sick person feels no pain from cauterization as long as they are healthy, because the body is completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is fitting that the fire cautery should be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in various iron instruments.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment let the patient eat flour several times with honey and other treatments until he is safe.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation arises in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not safe, then make fire cauteries on the member according to the size and shape of the member; and if the cautery goes inside the flesh of the wound, a little into the sore place, then treat with bandages until he is safe.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And at no time should one do cautery by hand and on the foot and on the back, to the end of the nerve where the member is mute, and thus if the inflammation exists; and let none get involved unless he knows the members and their exit points for moving the joints of the body.
de albaras	of hairs
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is old and the art of medicine is worthless, then apply cautery with a cautery knife by half to its depth, according to the quantity of the fat that is taken away, until the flesh is exposed, and is moved in color; then treat the cure with flour of vinegar and lentils with olive oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from chicken and blood from almonds, each one a part; and mix everything together, and tie it up with a bandage, and apply to the patient until he is cured.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure for the chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the chancre comes on at the beginning, and you look at it stop, then apply cautery to the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the turn of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	Instruct the wise men that we should apply fire cautery to the middle of the ulcer; and I do not think it is good, for I fear that it will cause ulcers and corruption, and I have never wanted to come across this before; and there is no more urgent thing than that they be cauterized inward, at the "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some have a disease called "adubelati" which cannot die because of its superfluity or because the old man is too weak and has little blood or time, and you see it hastening to death: then cauterize inward with many small cauteries on the point; after that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	It will soon die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced with the cautery at all of the cautery, so that the cautery is hot.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery pierces the liver, and so that the cautery is applied in such a way that the patient feels pain on the side it will cause inflammation.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, until he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cautery by fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", which is nothing but a gangrene of the limb, because it corrupts the members as much as fire corrupts dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this sickness in one who can suffer fire cautery together with fire, then take small and large calipers to the patient according to how much the sickness is; after cauterizing all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains, so that everything corrupted is burned out.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let him be for three days, and put on the patient's cauterized area a broken stick with oil until the scalding of fire is burned out, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of the painful kindled wound.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that no healthy thing is born, it's good; and if not, resume the cauterizing on the one who has remained corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Instruct the patient that this remedy is never cured by medicine water, but that cautery of fire is a greater aid; and I have already said the remedy for medicine water in division: take the amount you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of worms that come to the joints.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often at the joints due to disease, there is born a malady called "closure" according to our intention, and it is a great thing that causes great pain.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the remedies for this disease are according to two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, cautery of fire and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautery of fire is that you heat the scalpel as if it were a needle, and so make one from good iron to fit into every part, and have subtle margins; after that place it at the tip of the wound, and turn your hand all around the wound until the blood begins to flow; then let it be left for three days until it starts to putrefy; and then make a poultice of fresh mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on the whole wound overnight, and the lump will come out and be dislodged from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	When treating a dislocation, apply binding to clean wounds as long as they are open.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they have come out through the body, and many times occur in hands and feet, so it is suitable to apply hot cautery water: thus, take a cane of iron or wood, or a needle of copper, and set on the nail and the wound; that is, to burn warts; and put the cane so that it pricks all around, then put a little cold water on it, and hold well your hand, and press your hand turning so that the margin of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and finds the hot water deep enough to the root; and let the patient suffer for an hour with the burning of the hot water; then leave him as is, and he will come out all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	In this manner, do one after another, until you are sure of all those that are in the body, then treat the limbs that constrict and choke.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shiver from cold, or from fever quarter, or from another cause, it is fitting that you make four cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one cautery between each spine; and one on the flesh, and one on the stomach at the olive pit; leaving them to tremble, and hastening their recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pustulent sores or boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never do they appear from chance on the body's baths, or pustulent sores, that come from great corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	It is fitting to do the first one as soon as they appear that on every head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of fust of myrtle, so that the point may be grasped by fire, or from the root of aristologe long, or with the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And at no time are the cauterized from the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it cannot grow more in front, but breaks off the superfluousness that comes out, and is cured; but it is fitting that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great hemorrhages of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or with the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is much painful to stench.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Instruct the patient to hasten so that you apply your index finger on the wound of the vein, and pull it out with great force until the pain is appeased under your finger; then put olive oil cautery more small and larger ones until they are all red; then take I, or great or little according to the wound and how the artery is routed, and apply the cautery on that vein where you hold your index finger, and keep it there until it does not remain.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If the fire is extinguished when you lift your finger off the vein, and the cautery has gone out, then take it hastily, another cautery that is on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing this one after the other until they (the veins) are closed off; and beware that you don't burn the nerve which is near, and that no further harm comes to the sick person; and know that when the artery cuts off the flow, it cannot be properly closed itself when the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways we have mentioned: by cautery, or by extraction since it has not been treated, or by very tightly tied with thread, or by medicines applied which have power to close the veins; and it happens that they are tied and strangled.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will put a stop to swelling of something tightly bound with cloth or wrapped around, or doing other similar things, if it does not relieve itself.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens without any aid, and he has not oil or medicine present, then he must put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and properly dress it until the swelling is reduced from the wound and from the vein; and he should not move him, but let him stay cold with hot water so often that he becomes very cold and stiffened, swollen, and congested; and do these things in front to what he needs of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on treatments for wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	As we have said in the first chapter all diseases, whether it is necessary to cautery with fire or with medicine around, and ointments, causes, pus, and forms of cauteries; and I put this chapter from his head down to the joints, and I will go through this same way for that which one finds more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first cautery, and therefore you must be more careful.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you must not be foolish.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come in for treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	But those who come from people who have suffered so greatly from their illness that they die quickly due to the severity of their sickness, and the great power of their evil, and for these one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And when it comes to you who does so, and says: "Wait, I am cured"; and the sickness is hard-hearted.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not for your own benefit that you allow those who come to you and have this manner to do so, but rather put greater care in your honor than in your covetousness, and be neither idle nor foolish about what you are certain of and about which you have taken possession; and use pronostication and indication in the treatment of your sick patients to see if salvation is converted; for that will help you to gain a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear children, Our Lords entrust to you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Instructed you in this chapter by division into chapters, according to what is before or after the chapters of cauteries, which I have devised for you from the head to the toe, because it is easier to find what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Fill a cloth with water.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is often the case that this illness comes from time to time in children at birth, and when the baby holds it too tightly around the head of the child, and no explanation is known for it.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness except in children, and for all those who I have seen it has been the cause of death, and therefore it seems to me that it would be good to take out the work in parts.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	In the child because the shoulder joint is full of water, and the head engorges each day so much that it cannot bear; and he believed so much in the moisture that he was dead, and this moisture is assembled under the bone above the suture, between the cheek and the bone; and the wound is like that if the moisture is between the cheek and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you cut open the head with a large incision; and be so long as II of us, until the moisture runs out; and see there the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscess is larger, then you will make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the signs that you see the edges of the head opening up on both sides, and the water starts to flow when you press with your hand into it, and it does not return: then it is suitable to make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding the incision closed with bandages and powder, and applying wine and oil, let it be so for five days; then open it, and treat the wound by stitches and ointments, and let the head dry out, and feed the patient dried meat until the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to look at or open the size of the abscess and the assembly of the water; for it is sometimes before, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right side, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Measure then according to the size of the abscess, and the fulfillment of the water, and make the cut as you have the power; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and if a drop of blood flows, so that the patient dies from the accumulation of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of the reume
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When any disease called "catarre" occurs in the eyes or is very painful, and the disease has been present for a long time, and medicine does not provide relief, then the last resort is to use the cautery with what we cut off both the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary that when you cover the eyes, the patient makes a face towards his head; after he strokes it with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then remove the mucus from his neck using a whole cloth; then look where the vein swells, and the veins of both are after the ears, and they take some time to recover; then sign the swelling with ink; then cut one and the other of a well-made spatumile for two parts, until the vein reaches just above the bone, and so it is done by the width of his forehead.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, pour out the spatula on below the artery and cut above it as well, in cutting just like that across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, so it does not continue to bleed indefinitely.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feel, it is advised that you measure the space of three times, then cut deeper and go into the bone; because what needs to be put into the wound should be six or a little more, according to how much the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if the point of the bone is still on top of the spot where you sewed it, then cut that again since it does not seem to have been healed, then strain the wound and tie it, and provide rest until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Let goes of
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old inflammation comes, and coughing is good, due to moistors of tears and heat in the temples and an ancient sore and similar things, and he is treated with various medical cures and medicine, but it does not profit him, so we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauterized areas, just as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of extracting them is that the patients pull their hair back from their temples, and listen to the artery opening in the temple, because it opens well with its pulsing, and is not repaid quickly as in some people who are too cold; and if it is repaid, then he pulls his patient’s neck with certain cloths, then rubs the skin with a harsh cloth, and raises the skin of someone hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of that shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Instruct the patient to scorch the skin lightly until you see the artery, then take it up towards the head with pincers, and pull out well all the threads that are below these parts; and if the artery is subtle, then twist at the point of the needle, and cut off this part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if she is not cut, let her go without pain or discomfort in any way.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And take out the blood from six cubits, just as three; and if the artery is large, it is fitting that you tie it with two levers of a strong double thread of silk, so that no discharge occurs before the wound has healed, and the blood appears in a steady flow; then cut the surplus tissue between the two levers at this hour itself, and if you see, then cauterize with the cautery knife just as far into the bone until the joints are cut; and it is the most effective work, if the patient does not have fever and he has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery, is aid to finish the moistures: because of this it gives more aid to the moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract arteries, fill the vein with old cotton and put well-made tamps on top; and when you remove them, if they are cured with dry medicines that make charcoal, and tamps, until they are healthy again; and if without any injury to the artery as much as you do work, then hasten to cover with cautery, or use a leaden vessel and strain it in your hand so that the blood is not spilled; and if you don't have this present, put on the vein your must (or plug), so that they are not frozen, and draw the vein with cold water until it congeals, and straining it as necessary; and what is moist and lighter to extract from the artery is to cauterize the vein of this cautery with two parts, but the parts be well-spaced to keep its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the signs are too dense, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the two incisions should be large enough that one needs a thick iron rod, and then when you have cut off the two ends, cut hot metal along them so it comes to meet at the bone, and strike the vein in two; and let them be separated between the two incisions because there is no soldering of this cautery all over; and this is the form of cautery:
des larmes	of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing onto veins that are on the forehead near the top of the head, and it does not benefit from any medicine that we make, and you see the face of the sick person become flushed, and feel or sense a dullness in front of the eyes like numbness; and if the hairs of the eyebrows are wet and moist so that the eyebrow skin is burnt, and the skin is scalded by the heat of the tears, then it may be necessary for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the ancient 'cure contused', and you should repeat to the sick person who has this disease the hairs on their face; then you do III cuts or evenly according to the length of the front; and one of the cuts is as II do it all towards the chin in the direction where a pain is, and the other II are as II cost them by above the papers, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are at II these costs by above the papers; and keep your hand away from continuing II mandibules, and each wound should have III fingers through it; and take an sponge piece with a lot of cloths to absorb the blood, then pour the good spatumile in II parts of this is its shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the cut that is made towards the temple right up to the second cut; and burn all the wound that is between II cuts, to the extent of lou syfac which is above the bone, then make another part from the lower incision right up to the other second cut, and then pull out this spatumile.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you prick with the instrument called "cutting needle", and it is sharp from one side, and soft from the other, it's not sharp, and this is the shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And cut the bone towards the raw flesh to the spot, and the soft part towards the bone, and prick it until it comes to the middle split.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut off the vessels that come out from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous just as far as the spot where it opens; then make another cut in the middle split just as far as the other division; and then extract the blood evenly, and press out the flesh caught; then put a tent of clean cotton into each split, and cover with moist cloths of wine and oil and wax; and keep away any pus from coming out; on the third day dislocate the bandage, and apply great quantities of watered-down plant juice; then administer the Basilicon ointment with olive oil, and other cures for wounds, until he is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Do not move the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any vein is swollen by habit and custom, and you see the eyes clouded and small, and weakened the sight, and the papers burn; and the hairs fall out, and pain is felt in the head, and the patient coughs; then observe by these accidents that those materials and this swelling come from many veins, and the mother's cure if it is so.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to cover their forehead, then make a deep cut on both sides of the forehead and another one less wide near.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the wound of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision just up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerve endings on either side of the temples that move with pain; when the bone is exposed, sooth the bleeding with a sponge; then sew between the two lips of the wound and apply cotton wool and linen threads; then wrap dressings moist in wine and oil, and beware of infected pus; when it is healed, if you massage the bone until it starts to swell, then cure with remedies that draw out the swelling.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of poppy flower and four parts of colocynth, and make it infuse; and administer it in these wounds to prevent pain for all.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the bursting of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that comes out of the ears is one of four things: grain, animal matter, stone from a mine, or similar thing like metal; or seed, such as thistles, fennel, etc., or something flowing out like water and pus, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it comes out of the ear stone or some other kind of thing that does not fit into the ear, nor grows in the ear, if you put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then distill a little violet oil or sesame oil, and perform extraction; and let it be ejected by condensation, and wipe the nostrils when expelling comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool into the ear, and put the ear up on top.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often by this cure comes forth blood; and if it does not come forth, take out the extraction with subtle fingers, because in this there is form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps with the fingers, that is good; if not, take out the extraction on an onion-like swelling with a small double fold; and if it does not jump by this, make a candle of flax and pour the chief into the candle or ear canal very tightly, so that the vein cannot enter through the candle with wax; then pull forth the form, because often comes forth as we have said; and if it does not come forth in any way, grab with glue because you take out the ears, and put on some device that has a point for this purpose, and put a little cotton inside; then press the glue above the stone or whatever it is, and pull forth.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she will not heed all that we have said, then hasten to pierce the ear so that it bursts open as an abscess does, and spasm; and the manner of the piercing is such that you first make the patient whole again of the head, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small opening in the root of the ear at the fat or what depends on it; and make the opening as big as a moon, until you reach the bone, then pierce according to your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and the cure will last as long as he is whole.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is pus and it swells, administer the extraction; and if it will not come out, administer a slow-seeping poultice according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and let him make an incision of that flesh.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not cut me so when you think that the flesh is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then pull it out with fine fingers and a spoon, as we have said, so that the extraction may be eased.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In water then what is poured into the ear should be used with sterility of clothes first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And it may also fall on that same ear or when water is used.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she falls through because of this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If that's not the case, so he pricks many pieces according to how long your nose should be and soft, and takes one of his fingers in the ear, and pushes on the other side, and sets fire to a piece above the bone in the ear; and does not cease to prick this joint and bone until the water has all fallen out, and so it falls out entirely; and if you see, prick the joint again, and stick one of his fingers into the ear, and the other takes fire from the other side, until the skin is burned red; then do another piece of joints as long as the water has fallen out, just as we have said in the bone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of a lump, if it is small like a pus or similar thing, cure as we have said in division; but if it is large that you can feel, then extract with pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms, mark the ears when you cure, just as we have said in division and in treating distillations; if the cure does not help, then it is fitting that you look at the ear in the sun: if no worms appear, take out with fine pincers; and if they do not appear, take out a ring because this is the shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And sometimes narrow beneath, and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And let the most subtle thread in the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering; then form all the way around the ring. Do this often until all the worms are extracted.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	Instruct the patient to let them prick if they wish, so put a cotton thread inside as I said in the pier; and if they do not come out like we have said, administer dilutions as the ancients have proven in the operation of worms, and you will find or treat with dilutions; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, because it is that form which you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And whether it is of silver or of iron, put inside at the little holes, and above on the distilling, and to press into the distillation with the well-made instrument of iron, for if you see a razor and pass it through the cotton in anticipation of the point, then pour your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the canal, and the cotton be in the ear; then put the razor inside all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or just out of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and that the distillations should be heated to some extent like when they are done in the ear, and be careful that they are not too cold, for the medicine will not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	When the eustachian tube is burst.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have some defect in the ears; and this same thing happens to adults by bursting of a wound or a splinter inside the ear, and these ruptures come from deep into the ear, unless one can see it; and sometimes there is such a big hole that it's hard to look at; and sometimes the hole is small, and you can't see much.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	This one that comes deep into the ear, if you can't see it, is due to pain in various conditions, and when you look inside, you should put the patient's ear to the sun; and look: if you see a visible opilation (i.e. inflammation or redness), then this is the shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And if you prick and cut all over the face, in front and back of every spot, so that it does not strike the ear; if the operation is on a nose or bone of the ear, then take care if you have fine points, and carefully cut so that those bones are completely hollowed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operation is deep inside the ear, take a fine razor light and carefully shave it, then put on the bone of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel that there is an operation in the ear where the patient feels severe pain in the ear, carefully pierce, and keep from spoiling the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of a perforated drum, and a poultice in the Egyptian manner.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to do nothing until the wound is healed, or you take a poultice made from lard and rosewater, and powder with vitriol on top of it; if you see the ear swell, then cover yourself so that you treat the poultice and move another one moistened in cress oil and wax, until the swelling goes away; then attend to the patient until he is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the swelling returns, then soak an sponge in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use other treatments that reduce the swelling of blood, which are for treating bleedings.
de la char des papieres	of charcoal from paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Place a piece of charcoal on the eyelids when they are moist and dry again, if it is needed to spread them with tongs and tweezers, and cut off one of its roots with a spatula; then put powder made from vitriol on top.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	If the fire cautery is not cut off, then the cautery will burn the fine lens, and after the incision it will be painful to move; and many times are healed, but no part remains of its roots; and when those roots are burned by fire, they do not return.
de la gresle	Of the gallows.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come worms in paper under the eyelids which seem like gall on their shape and hardness, and because of that this sickness is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of thick moisture above and below; the workmen are such: take care if the grandine moves from one side and the other, and it's a light thing to know; do then with a broad knife, then scrape off lightly from each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover the wound with skin piercing slightly on the paper, do not grieve the patient; and if the fissure is large, assemble it with a seam, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the ointments will restore it immediately and relieve pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the smallpox is coming down into the ear canal towards the upper part, pierce and press paper from above, and let the smallpox spread on pincers, and cut and squeeze from both sides; and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it will not grieve; and when the smallpox is cut, clean the oily salt water, and cure the patient until he is healed, relieving pain.
de la graisse des eulz	From the fat of the eyes.
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	This is a fat that is woven in mesh of paper threads, and this happens to children who have no one to care for them. It causes great pain to their eyes, and they come with catharres (diarrhea) in the mornings, and cannot see into the light of the sun because the tears are running out of their eyes; and because of this they lie down on their faces afterwards, and sleep under their noses, and have moist paper above their eyebrows that the inflammation makes and the appearance has been covered with the exinach which opens in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on it with your two hands and feel the exinach inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of opening is that the sick person places his head on your healthy one; and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach contained in each part, and place it thereupon; and press with your two hands from one side and the other, so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; and then make an incision at the midpoint of the moist area up to the spot where you cut into a vein; and let the skin be sewn in such a way that it does not become large like the wound you made on the healthy vein; and make the leather according to your will until you reach the exinach; and in further arrangements, comes out of the incision a piece of white grease.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take out then as much cloth gauze as possible between your two arms at once and turn your hand to right and left so it is spread; and keep in mind that you should not add more to the wound than necessary, lest you come to the point where the whole shoulder is raw until the oil is gone.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the extraction does not open up at the beginning of the wound, then cut slightly on one side of the wound so it appears; then cut as we have said, then bind with cloth easily and wetly, and put the limb on, and tie with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if some such men who break silken thread and place it to corrupt that moisture which is left.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure until he is cured.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the artery hot, then the physician should apply ointment soothing until he is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs from paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs of paper are born and are other than their nature, and have become diseased, they cause the eyes to be injured, and bring about various kinds of diseases such as tearing and softening of the eyes, and the presence of larmes (likely meaning "blemishes" or "spots") and albugine (likely meaning "ecchymosis" or bruising), until it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; and a cure is done in four manners: either by cautery with fire together, or by medicinal water according to what is before the chapter on cautery, and they are made either by incision and sewing or by caning, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your table, then turn the paper of oil at your left hand; if it is turned, it's good; if not, let him prick with an arrow through all his hair; and take the thread from above at whatever distance from these hairs, and turn it up to the razor; then make in the part under the paper, near the hairs gathered, all around the circumference of the scab, from the large laceration just to the small one; then pull out the thread, and put over the paper a small tent of cotton and lace, then sign on the paper an image like that of mirte, and whatever is fitting according to what you see lifting the paper which is devised for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et if to anyone with a serious matter you copy a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is moistened; then make on all the surrounding area up to two lines that you have signed, and start from great sharpness at small; and let it be one of the cuts near the natural hairs in the size of a root, then pour it into one of the two angles where there is warmth; then scrape it all away; then bring together the two lips with an sewing needle to one fine thread of flax, and clean the wound, and make it dry on both ears at all sorts of things stuck, if you have seen this done before; and if not, do not bother, then leave the sewing and the threads just for three days or four; then treat the wound with dried and tied things, because the paper comes to life at the moment of the wound and the assembly of it, but the sewing is tough (as the ancients have said), and this is a wrong doing with fear; and if you do it in another way: and is that you take the paper of a figure which is just as like the handle of myrtle, as we have counted, at three times according to the shape which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut off that which overhangs equally, according to its shape, because.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you have no power to hold the tongs, and that thing is not even, take a needle or if it has a thread, and tie it around the figure; and tie the other thread on the larger seam, and the smaller thread on the one, and assemble between your two hands the threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and cover all the skin where you have stitched, as we have counted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, sooth it with cerote and similar ointment soothing; and sometimes happens that the hair on the scalp are changed: if you must use what we have said about cutting; but the stitching in one and another is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the fractures is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and the flesh inside according to what I said, and then do II caines by art, and II subtle ligatures also long as the paper and the wide stretch of the spatulate tool are; and cut off II fingers of II parts where you hold the strings; then assemble one and the other subtly above that which lies under the paper of the oil, and strain the two caines from the two parts form; and leave it like so for some days, and the skin that is tightened will wither, numb, and prick, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is late, if you cut with one hand a strong force, then the cure until he is sane; and when the wound is healed, and the paper is lifted, and the pain will not come again to the hair; and this is the form of the two caines that you make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	Instruct the one who chases to treat and let the hairs grow if they do not come forth with it; then chase after it under the skin all the way down until it comes out at the wound, so that you see it by the vision of oil; then chase and the thread, and close the oil and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days or more, until the hair grows in its place and falls out with the char on top; if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the cheekbones nature, and raise them along with that one, until they become long and then lift.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil's spoilage
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the spoilage comes into the oil, it occurs in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens by sudden wound, or incision, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of opening it is that you cut through the sore, and open the lips, and put linen tents inside, and tie so long as they are healing; and it is not advisable to use in the treatment of it only things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but to overcome it with softening things, like fenugreek; and boiled rose water or ale, and seed of flax, are cooked; and ointments of melted diaquilon are applied in any of the oils, and a tent is wrapped up, and the cure of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you take care not to melt it again in the same form as it was before; and this work which we have mentioned is only a similar cause of this disease, which returns in the same form as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the flesh which comes from the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This sickness that is below and truly is called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the vein in the work is such that you prick an arrow, because it has two threads, and the needle pierces into the flesh, and you make it pierce to the left shoulder so much that the thread comes out through two joints of the flesh; then take the flesh up to the top with all the needle, and cut off one spatumile wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the skin of the paper returns to its place as it should, that's good; but if not, then take a razor and put it in the wound, turn the paper, and make two cuts on one side inside the paper; and so that the joints of the two cuts meet at the angles of the incision you made, and that when they are assembled, the figure will be like the figure of the letter "I griesche"; then take away that flesh according to the quantity that its sides are below from the paper, and then join the two parts together with the threads of a linen thread; then give the cure for what we have said about the medicines softening, and cauterizing, until he is cured.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et if the sickness comes from cutting or sewing or cautery, it is fitting that you cut an open plain wound below the hairs of the paper skin, and according to what has been said; then cut between the two fingers of a tent, as I have said; and must one do the work according to the form of the illness, for it is much diverse in form, and the wise masters make a machine from all possible means by which he makes the figure return to its natural shape; and the sick themselves, according to what they need treatment and instruments for more cases.
dou soudement de la papiere	Suddenly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	So that the paper above is stuck with oil white and cannot move or do its natural work, if it so happens then you should put the point of a razor under the paper, and raise it up; and the cutting is done according to the lines, until you copy what is correct on the stylus subtle, which should not be too rough nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot suffer from the stylus being too rough or bleeding oil; and let your incision, where you scrape off that assembly, gently, so that the paper comes back according to its natural form; and it is cured of that entire assembly, and never happens again with astringent oil salted, and lye brought in fresh water, and vinegar; then put between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and put on the oil wool moist with lard; and after three days use the lye and other quick remedies until it is cured.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the unglet of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two kinds of joints: one is nervous and appears like a thick fur, and the other is not nervous but resembles a white frost congealed, when touched with iron and treated with pan, it does not bleed; and both kinds seem to approach the great vein, and slowly increase until they cover the whole view and all light and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient places his head on your clean cloth, then closes his eyes; and lifts the paper to his hand, then cuts the joint as stitches of small double sewing, and stretches it upwards; then takes a needle, and puts in horse, or calf, or ox hair, and strong thread; and doubles the point of the needle slightly and pierces into the joint, and fills with all the needle, and ties the joint with a thread and stretches it upwards, and scrapes off at the whole length of the skin on the cost of the joint that follows the vein and the silk to the hair just to the head, then chops away the remaining in the root of the vein up to the fine and small forces, and leaves the natural color of the vein, if no blood comes from it; and sometimes stretches only the joint onto a lump, and on thread, as we said; then scrapes off with all the fine and smooth spatumile of why this is like.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to keep the scab from touching the raw flesh and let it break, and do not perceive the purpleness; and after the incision anoint with oil a little bit of crushed silk, and make a poultice on the neck, and leave it until the other day; then the cure should treat as much as is necessary so that he may be healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not stiff and you cannot pierce it with the needle, and the unguent cannot enter, this sort of swollen nail is often cured by medicines; and it will grow as I have described in division, and if you see it covered, apply oil to the patient, and take the scab lightly according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the swollen nail carefully, and if you see that it is not softening at all and the infection advances, then distill from your mouth into oil a poultice made of crushed lead and red lead, and apply it to the neck; leave the oil until the next day; then continue with another operation according to this same method until it is entirely hollowed out.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no inconvenience to you in the oil, as with foot pus, then apply the poultice and treat the boil until it is healed; and then resume work on it as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the skin is marred by great inflammation in the oil due to a swelling, if one pricks at an abscess and not too much, that no blood flows; then dilute red oil in the oil, which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the charcoal that is born under the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	But if the eyes of some men never produce any red charcoal, and cover the eyelid and restrain under paper towels and bandages away from it, and seem like a rose of balsam; and wounds are such that patients place their head on your healthy side, then work on the eyes, and apply all that charcoal has suitable unguents to it, and support it with force; then make the first incision, and continue cutting as long as the raser is near the end, and be careful not to bleed the oil at the wound; and perform the incision of spatumile, just as we have said about the incision of the ulcer, and with small forces so that one can open the swell; just like the form after this chapter shows. And when the incision is completed and all the charcoal has been removed, apply the oil of silk broken or distill red collier and similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton on the oil with linen wool, if it will be secure to have an abscess; and if nothing remains, and the swelling does not go away, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing medications for abscesses. Then return to your work until it is healed, and do so as I have said that charcoal should be applied in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you balance the treatment of each case with a gentle touch in both the natural way and the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see if this member is suffering from that injury.
des voines des eulz	of the eyelids
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	They are red veins that cover the flesh, and they take away their work and weaken the flesh every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is then the duty of the first thing you observe that there are veins, in what state they are, whether swollen or not, and if there is no other disease than swelling; therefore, the coil in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on a clean surface, then suspend those veins as long as possible according to your wisdom, and let the subtle ones double up in that form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be two times one by degree in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then cut as gently as possible those veins, and apply the blood hour after another, until you see remove the veins from the oil; and guard that you do not strike the oil with the points of the lancets, and perform this work at hour of noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you only cut those veins; and when you have done this, if you distill oil colored green and red to corrupt what remains on the liver.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have power to cut all that in that hour, then apply a poultice on the oil with soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pains are eased and make sure there is an abscess hot, then resume according to this manner until they are healed.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the armpit abscess
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The wound which they name "arissati" fistule: when you treat it with cautery and medicine hot according to what I have said, and it is not healed, then there is infection in it that you pierce above the abscess, where it must die, and remove all the moisture that is in it, until the bones are uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bones are uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, if the abscess has the same form; and it is called "aspre chief", and make it from fire on the cheek, as it was in this form: point it out like a knife just like it is in the present condition:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on the bone of the corrupted part, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you know when this corruption is reduced; and do this once, then restore to its normal form with medicinal exorcisms.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joint is swollen and it inflames, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and remains like that for 40 days, and does not heal, and no infection comes, then know that he is healthy; but if this is not the case, if there is no other cure than to bring back the fistula to the perforated part according to this shape: and it is so that you uncover the bone the second time by iron, with medicines sharp, and when it heals uncovered like this, take a bow of three points, and the fist be softened just above the head as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put the bow on top of the bone, and keep your hand away from the wound for a little while, then turn to the whole forest until it pierces the bone and you feel the patient's pain as he comes in with his hand on his nose; and when he swallows and hardens the joint, then direct the matter onto the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the issue of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully opened and do not come out or become lessened, if it is necessary to cut off the patient; then apply, now the remedy, now put on ointments with oil, made of ice and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the oil, and anoint on a plaster with bands and cloths; and the method of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough, and double each one in four, and then put one over another according to the quantity the eyes have need of; then strain by the braid of a strong band, and reapply the ointments to suck; now remove the ointment and let the oil be strained day and night, and if it is bound with thread, so that you tie it much; then remove the thread after the day and the night, and if you see the oil repairing, this is good; if not; then reapply the plaster and the cloths and the ointment and the suckers until they are well.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The downfall of the eel-like shape
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the veil of the eel-like shape comes undone, and opens up, and comes out through the paper as if from a grain of resin, it is truly astonishing to see; therefore if you look at it carefully, the wounds are such that you need to insert an awl into the root of the part under the jawbone to one side of this position, then insert another awl where there is the double thread from the inner corner; and pierce it, and leave the first awl according to its disposition; then cut off the long thread and tie a portion of the vein around it, and bind it well, then pull out the awl and apply oil with linen soaked in more oil of dates; and let it remain until the threads contract with the vein, and treat the oil on soothing things so that the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is bound by the vein each part in a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes do great appearance, so you should perceive in the spot below subtle which is coming from the oil, and chase the moisture that stains and down descends the eyes, and enter as soon as possible; then extract them until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the oil in the bowel
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This illness called "alcunnati" is only in the bowel which is assembled in oil, appearing like flowing water but it's not really water; and the way of its appearance is that you should seat the patient on a special seated bed straight, then take his head between your two hands of II parts, and let him move until you see the bowel coming up to your eyes; then fix it, and don't let it descend or break loose the light, and observe the patient's things as they usually do; if it doesn't descend below, know that it's water, and if the bowel's movement isn't assembled like we said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you sit the patient between your hands, then take the spatula and put it up to the cornea with the continuity of the conjunctive with the cornea and the crown, until the bow is; and when it has come out, distill into warm oil mixed with melted honey or boiling fenugreek, or milk, then be cured with another cure until they are healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the likeness of water in division, and that which is needed to pierce; if we operate according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary to sit the patient between your hands crossed, with the light of fire by the sun, and tie a strong oil-based bandage; then put a piece of the oil-soaked paper in your left hand if their eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if they are on the right. Then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if their eyes are on the left, or in your left hand if they are on the right; then put the point of the instrument near the crown by the thickness of a thread into that thin layer of oil at the inner side of the membrane; then pour the "almagda" instrument virtuously and turn your hand until it pierces into the oil's thin layer, and feel when "almagda" comes to the empty space; and it is necessary that the measure of "almagda"'s passage be equal to the full length of the span which is from the apple's pit to the end of the nail's edge; and this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the cornea, then put the instrument just next to it or into the aching part, and press with another passage after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water is flowing now, then he sees the patient before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, and the water starts flowing again, put the force with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not rise, gently pull out everything lightly in rotating your hand a little bit; then put back into the oil a small piece of linen gauze, and clean that within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by force the oil into a cloth or linen soaked in olive oil and an abundance of rue, and bind with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	And so, as for those of our time, let us put on a poultice with bruised comfrey and an abundance of rue.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the milk cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, because there are several men who have hard eyelids, you must take the instrument called "alberit", so that it is in the correct form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And therefore pierce the conjunctive alone, and do not move too far forward, but make it subtle, then put in milk, as we have said; and when you complete the work, the doctor attending comes along, because he sleeps on his back in the dark room; and be careful of all movements, and give light viands, and do not move your head or right arm or left arm, and be bound according to its disposition for three days a day; then release it in that same dark room, and examine his sight, and make him see some things, and then set the bandage for five days; and it is not advisable to do this in the house of cure now or after the incision, but it is necessary to alleviate it, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	In case of an abscessed limb, instruct the patient to let it be opened on the seventh day, and the advice of one who has soothed an abscess; and when it is appeased, then release the eye and put on its face, a woolen cloth for covering each day, and stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then they come from the house little by little, and it converts into his case; and one learns that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the East, who said that in some other land people do alchemy, with which they make water, but I never saw it or heard of it in any book of the ancients; and by chance, this may be a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the forms of alum, because those who do not know them see them as if they were impure. And so be cautious:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of this same subtlety be cut off at an angle of three.
de la char sor le neis	with charcoal on the nails.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Never has charcoal grown on the nails in diverse forms, so that some seem like scorpions from the size; and when it is of such kind that it is studded with foreign material and colored flesh, and then with soft-colored bone.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In such case, of the soft charcoal, which is not studded with anything, it is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and let fall upon those chars, the fumes; because, as long as you can sustain them to the subtle powder good at the spot, until you know that all the charcoal has fallen out.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	In case some thing remains that cannot be covered, if you apply all the subtle instruments lightly, so it does not stay anywhere; and if there is no swelling or abscess, cut the swelling as needed; and if it's a malignant abscess, hasten and cauterize until the blood stops flowing and the bones are exposed completely, then remove it quickly.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If there is no discharge and moisture comes just to the palate, it is considered a sign of healing; and if moisture does not come when needed, it is considered that there is a bone fracture in the above place, where the instruments do not come for cutting: then it is convenient to put a thread of linen in it, and tie it securely with fingers, and put some space between each other so much as to allow; and apply the sick person's head with the thread to the wound powerfully, until it comes through into the mouth; and this is an easy thing for him who wants to do it; then hold the chief that comes by the thread in one hand, and the chief that comes by the mouth in the other hand, and feel one after the other as we are with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Instruct the patient so that you know the truth about the flesh, then take care of the child, clean the wound, and pour Egyptian oil into the wound, and put it straight onto the skin as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode everything remaining of the flesh; and then apply a bandage made from linen on no other day than necessary until it is healed, and if he needs dried medicines, use them; this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, because we distill oil and medicines in the linen:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And if it is made of silver or lead, resembling a lamp with an overhanging handle, like a lantern, and so conducted; and if you see one, make a lantern-like bandage, and let the instruments be open to purify the head; and have one hand on the head to hold it when the oil or any liquid is heated.
de la char sor le neis	Of the charcoal from the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	The disease named "telul" often arises from the nose of a child and grows into large abscesses until it becomes visible; therefore, you must apply a poultice to the beginning, and burn hot medicine on it; and if it is delayed for too long so that it becomes large, then be cautious with it if it is hard and of bad smell, from dung color, and poor flesh: do not touch it with iron because this is an enchanted abscess, for once you cut it, great evil will come to the patient; and if the abscess is soft and of foul smell, but you see that it can be covered, then take away the poultice and apply it again with fear, and treat the abscess with dried things and binding.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nails are struck and pounded
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Saying that when some solution comes from one of these old cartilages, it benefits little, whether in men or women.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to examine this carefully if the wound is fresh all through with its blood; and then add two stitches to it, and treat him until he heals; and if the lips are cut off one side and the other, it is advisable that you burn all the parts of his skin where they are damaged until they heal, then reassemble the two lips to a suture, and tie them, and powder with powdered dragon's blood and incense, and apply a piece of emplaster of strong or another plastering compound, and let him rest until he begins to cough up it, then treat him with ointment until he heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of sewing is that you assemble the sutures: either with needles, as we have said in sewing around the belly; or with thread, as I told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	With the help of the hands it goes into the lips abscess, similar to grains of sand, small and larger; therefore you must return the lips, and cut each one open, and take out with tweezers and strike in each part; then apply liquid after the incision with vitriol broth, until the abscess is drained; and then clean and treat the wound with dry things until it is sane.
de la char des gencives	of the gums' flesh
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Here is the translation:
des sordens	of wounds
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	There are no cases where the roots of teeth are gathered at the top of the gums inside the mouth between the teeth, with rough and unpleasant scars; and there are no cases where a black and yellow tooth and root come out, until corruption reaches the gum, and they become foul. It is advisable to seat the patient in your hands, so that their joints remain still, and remove the roots or scars whenever you see them, until nothing remains; and thus perform blackening and greenish tinting, and jaundice, and other treatments, until they are clean. If one thinks that it is at the root of a tooth, this is good; if not, if it recurs on the second day and the third day, until you have removed all of them; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work shows, because the razor used for cleaning teeth has different forms than the one used between the teeth. These forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you wait as long as you can before taking it out, because this should not be done slowly; for it is a very high substance just made hence and therefore we have no excuse for delay.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to take it out, it is necessary that you be certain about the soundness of the tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the patient suffers pain and thinks it is a tooth that needs to be extracted; so you should treat the good tooth instead. And if this does not alleviate the pain for him, watch out in case the evil one is inside because we have never wanted to do this before with those doctors; and when you are certain about the soundness of the tooth, it is necessary to scorch around the tooth all the way to its end, using a strong instrument to prevent the gums from becoming inflamed in all directions. Then pull out your two fingers or use pincers very subtle at first, taking them apart until they are well cleaned, and then firm up the pincers; and hold the patient's tooth between your palms, with his teeth inside, so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth directly towards the break, and if it doesn't fall out, take any of these instruments and put them inside each part lightly, and move it as you have done first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is perceived and extracted, it is fitting that you fill the space with cloth, where or when the gap is; and if you tie it gently with pincers so that it does not break while being tightened; and it is highly recommended to moisten over the gum for loosening the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And do it well in guarding that you break it not, and let remain a part, and return to the patient by the root with greater pains of the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And guard that you do not do as the ignorant physicians who by their haste and boldness break the chariot every time, and do not bring them those things which we have told, but sometimes they come from the oquistion of this great malady through the roots that remain, or because they break the cartilage; just as we often wish; and when the tooth is weak, wash the mouth with wine or vinegar and salt; and if bleeding comes, it often happens, so apply the lead plumb to break; and if this does not come, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the tumours, for which one must remove the bone first, are those with long points and large hooks, so that they do not double back when you pull out the bone; and these are:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And are large limbs such that they do not bend when pulled, and are made of iron well-crafted, and have teeth to hold them.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the bone
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains at the pulling, it is advisable to place on the limb moist cotton soaked in butter once a day or twice.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the limb is softening, then it's advisable to apply the tongs called "algefry", because the head seems like a care; and they are made in such a way as a file and that's the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out through all these cuts, so it is fitting that you uncover the whole flesh around the root, and then place the instrument called "althal", which is a scalpel, in such a way that this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And even if it is big and hard so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out because of this, that's good; but if not, then help with all the instruments, for then the forms will come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has two knives, for it is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are placed in front of the reason for the teeth, and with this instrument that resembles great pincers, for it is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And so be this instrument firm that it cannot break, and know well how many instruments of bone are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the skilled masters discover by themselves their own instrument, according to what his works and illnesses show, because there is among them some diseases for which they do not teach any instrument due to the diversity of such cases and if it breaks neither on the bone nor on other bones, or it pierces, so I seek the instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and help with movements, because this is their form.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And so be these instruments large and well-held to hold the bone, which will not break but can hold it and remove it; and then restore the patient with medicines that are suitable for this, and if there is corruption in the bone, and it is small, if it is restored with all these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear neither in their natural form nor according to the body's nature, and the shape is ugly, and even in young girls, it is fitting that you should know whether the teeth are set after the tooth, and not in the right place, and one cannot soothe or calm them: thus the line; and if it is crooked with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is as shown, and is like a small beak, and is made of iron well-suited for this purpose.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cope (or chisel) is used little by little for a few days for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the other teeth, and if it seems possible to straighten it, then take a piece of lime whose form is as shown:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the lime from which one makes needles; and in lime, the tooth is polished a little by little with gentle movements for days, so that it does not move until it chisels; then the smooth surface at the end has no sharp edge, and if the teeth are too sharp, they will cut the tongue; therefore, it is fitting to sharpen them so that they become even, so that the tongue is not cut or corrupted by bad speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth loosen, either by percussion or by falling out, and the patient cannot press down on it so that it does not break, and you have tried to cure them with medicines that restrict it, and this doesn't work; if they need to be restrained with a thread of gold, because the threads of silver turn green and rot, but gold never moves; and whether the thread is too thin or too thick or too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are receding, then take out the thread and put it back double between the two healthy teeth, then insert the pins between my teeth, if there are one or more, until you achieve a proper fit; then resume covering where you started, and carefully release your hand so that it does not move; and let your ligature be close to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Instruct the physician to cut the nails with a needle and assemble them, and then put them between the healthy teeth, so that they do not bleed on the tongue; and then let it be tight until it can last for as long as possible, and if it comes loose, or the thread breaks, tie it with another thread; thus it will remain and serve him as long as he can, and this is the form of the nails and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two crooked ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, if it is put back in its place, of fresh to fresh, as we have said; and do not let anyone else who does not know and suffer, for at no time is the shape made like a bone of a cow's teeth, and then put it in where the fault is, and tie it on as we have said, and keep it there until such time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Covering the ligament of the tongue.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	There is no ligament that comes from below the tongue or naturally, unless they are born so; or by accident of a wound; and the marks are such that you open the mouth of the patient, keep his head in your hands, and lift the tongue; then cut the nerve of the large tongue, until the tongue is loosened from its place, and if there's scar tissue or anything else, and it's due to sudden injury, so inject something and cut on the large one that ligament; and make sure the cut isn't too deep, because of the artery that is below; and when you've done that, lift him into a warm rose-water and anoint him with oil, then put a towel made of linen under the tongue; let it stay that way for each patient at night, so they can recover.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the blood is flowing again, put sulfur on the wound; and if it does not flow, cauterize with the fire cautery, which is good for that, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see the wound be red or black or hard, but the patient does not feel it, and do not touch anything, because it is a chancre; and if it is declining to pus, and there is moisture, take away the lump, and make an incision on one side and the other, and if it does not flow again at your work, put sulfur on it until it is stained, then return to your work until you have treated everything thoroughly; then lift the limb with ease and with care, and treat him with other cures until he is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Evacuation of an abscess from the throat.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No abscess ever comes from inside the throat where they call "godath", and the skin around it is called "amandres". When you cure it, if we have said so in division, and it doesn't heal, be careful: if there's a hard abscess of small size with a fleshy color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it's red and the root is big, do not touch it with iron, for fear of the bleeding; but let it be left until it dries up, and then you will cut it, lest it bursts on its own. If it's white in color again, and the root is subtle, have prepared the instrument to cover it, but first check if the abscess has dried up and calmed down.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore fix the patient in front of the sun, and let his joints be clean, and he works the mouth and presses the surgeon's hand between his fingers, and presses the tongue down towards all the instrument, so that there is the form; and it may be made of silver or fine gold as well as our knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Press the tongue towards all this instrument, and you will see the abscess, if take the lancet and cut in the almond, and pull out the pus until it can no longer be pulled; and pull off any thread from the wounds with, then cut at the instrument, so that there is the form which resembles a force; and look to see the head are curved, and one side towards another, and they are very good, and are made of iron or tin.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then use these pliers, for it is of this form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be cut from one side and the other side, and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot and cold water, or cold water mixed with grape skins cooked or dried leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is free from inflammation; then continue the cure until they are healed, and at no time do they produce more swelling in the throat than two almonds, cut them accordingly as the two almonds hold.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was in her throat, namely the small abscess; and had I tightly closed the entire throat so that the woman could not breathe through the obstructed passage, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she remained like that for one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses were deep, so high they had to be cut into two places by two openings through the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then made a cut in one of them and put in one needle, then I applied fire to it and took out three inches through the nose; then I cut another in the other opening and applied pressure to the throat and pressed the tongue; afterwards I put a needle into that abscess and cut off a part of it and only blood came out a little; and thus I cleaned the neck conduit for the woman, and she now began to drink cool water and then wine, and did not stop cutting that abscess for a long time; because it kept returning and filling with liquid until it was very large; so I took it out and cauterized inside the throat: thus she remained still for some time; and I left those parts to God afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the nose descends to the eye and it is drawn in and extended, if it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is not large and rounded, but rather a swelling or an ulcer.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cut as we said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the swelling subsides, and it is subtle, so it should be copied; and when it is rounded and not long, it is more painful; and if it is sanguine or dark red or black, then it is better to remove the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	Because there is great danger for the sick person.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner in which I told you, the shape and length of the swelling, you must sit the patient facing the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument we have remembered here before; then poke the needle into the eye, and draw it out so that it is not too tight, and cut with two instruments as I said for the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Instruct the patient to cover only the superfluity that is beyond the natural limit; for if you do more, it will grieve your voice and talk, and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure until it is sane.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of cutting, it is fitting to use oil at the cautery.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of the cautery is like ice water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient puts his head on your healthy one, and then presses the tongue with the instrument we have said about cautery, wrapped in hot, live wax, so that it is neither too thick nor too thin; and thus takes hold of the upper part of this instrument, for this is its shape.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to put a small amount of medication into their mouth, as with a spoon, and place the instrument on top of their nose; and let the sick person sit upright so that saliva and mucus run from their mouth into the medicine, so it does not go down the throat, and into the stomach. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press firmly onto the nose, for half an hour's worth of time until you see the signs of the medicine taking effect and the itching subsides; and if you notice, take cotton and wipe off any instruments, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and pour the instrument into the cotton bag above, until the cotton sticks to the nose; and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and clean up afterwards four days or five. If you need to restart the cautery of the medicine, restart it, and after doing so, clean off the medicine with cotton under the nose, in butter and flour, and cleanse that which was surrounded by the medicine.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more safe than incision, whether it's cautery or not. If it's treated with fumigation according to this manner, take camomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and arnica and similar herbs, and assemble all or any of them in an oil pot, and put it aside, and make boil; and the pots should be well glued with strong earth, and in the pot have a headstone according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And if of silver or lead, and either one of the headstones poured into the mouth of the sick man until the vapor rises up through the eye by the nose, until the eye is numbed; after that, repeatedly do so until the eye dries, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the rising of the abscess, because many things happen; and do it no more than when the abscess turns.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	If the fire cautery is not present, take a candle and put it inside the patient's head, so that their mouth does not feel too hot; for the hot candle does not weigh down the vapor in the mouth, and this is a good cure to bring health together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often it happens that a splinter from the fish or any other thing gets stuck in the throat, so it is best to treat what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun until you see the thing; and if nothing comes out and is pushed back into the throat, it is wise to make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked inside the stomach; by chance, if it gets stuck again in the vomiting, or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, a piece of bread, a piece of lettuce root, or a small piece of dry bread, and ties it with a thread, and then glues it; and when it comes loose, you will pull out; and if it does not come loose as we have said, take an instrument from the plunger according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And so the curved instruments are made for the head if they can more easily enter into the throat, and if the head is lifted up high; and be careful that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all of the blood come out, nor push the bone inside; and make sure that the patient puts in the instrument, because he feels it going through or on the thing is roughened; so if he swallows, or it is carried over for a whole instrument evenly, until it is done.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat without pain.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is the throat given medicine unless as I said in division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the patient's throat to the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see a boil, so that it has all of its small hair surrounding it, or have fine nails that are worth those.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	But if it is not worth, then take a thread of hair and put it in the throat of the sick person, then pierce or cut off with hot iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if they are drinking the sick all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, and open the mouth, and let it flow inwards to be swallowed, and move it with their hand often; and as soon as the boil feels the water, it vomits.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not vomit as we have said, then perfume the sick person with asafoetida in the instrument that I have mentioned for fumigation of the wound; do this many times, because she will sneeze with tar.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Et the manner of fumigation is that you pick up an empty pot in which there are hot coals, and cover it with a sieve pierced in the middle, and then in that hole, the nails of the instrument will fall; then you put your fumigation, and the patient puts their head over the can in their mouth, and closes their mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes out just there; and now the cough comes, and if it does not come, you continue with fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat foul things and ashes, and do not drink water at all; and then they will be cured by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument used to treat an abscess is when it can be seen, resembling curved tongs for nails to enter into the neck; and it has a resemblance to the beak of a swan, and it has roughness of lime, so that what takes hold of it cannot release.
li chapistres des apostemes	The surgeon of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many are like abscesses, as is remembered in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two kinds, one of which is similar to the other, and it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second kind is for those inside the body or in their flesh.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Because the abscesses in the head are different from those in the bone, and the abscesses in the liver have a different judgment than those that come into joints, and each has its own consideration in work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that should not be pierced, until the bone is dead according to its completion; and if of those types it is necessary to pierce them when they are believed to be true, and do not die according to their completion, as those which are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when an abscess comes from the joints and one leaves it until it is putrefied, by chance if they are corrupted, the ligament and nerve of the joint, because this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is near a principal limb and you delay perforation until it is dead, if it harms the principal limb; or if it's near the foundation, if it's pierced in such a way that it dies; and it's not wise to pierce an abscess when you're certain that digestion has been completed, for fear that the one near the foundation will rot through from within, and become fistulous, and cannot be cured in a great term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is wise that you know the size of the perforation of the abscess when it is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is assuaged, and the departures of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening of the swelling and the sharpening of the chief of the abscess, and other signs; and it is wise that you make a perforation in a place more distant from the abscess, and where it opens, and not in a long distance in the body, if the abscesses are on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and wherever they are equal so as to have no more pain.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these that are bent, by one of each limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when there is an abscess in the skull, if you value your life, so that you allow the perforation to complete until it is confirmed by completion of digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce before it, so that the body is filled with venom of it, and is full of much filth; and by chance the lips and the fundament of it become hardened.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess is pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limbs have need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is fitting that you administer small punctures for small abscesses, small punctures for small ones; and for large abscesses, large punctures, and many wounds according to the similarity of their size. And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut out the source, and cover; when they have become as we said, worn away like a torn piece, so it is fitting to do as we do for boils: and if there are those that are split into three angles, and those from which you puncture like the bee of myrtle, like abscesses in the joints; and if there are others where one makes a round cut, and other cuts, and similar punctures.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	In those without a head, as an abscess is soft and superficial, it is necessary to let the pain go through fully; and when the abscess is big, and has collected much blood, and you allow some of it to pass, so that not all of it passes in one hour, but rather only a part, then stop the abscess just the day before, then take away nothing from that place; do this many times with great care, until the bowels are whole; at the same time, if the patient is weak in virtue, or an elderly woman, or little child, or decrepit old man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	So you expect to fail at times when the outcome of the blood is known, and perhaps the patient will die, and you should not be disappointed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter then with great care, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound heals, and look to see if the wounds from the abscess are small; and if it's a plain incision, apply tenths of linen or old cotton; and if there are large abscesses, and much pus, it is necessary that you put one tent in each so they come into contact with each other; and if you have pierced the skin around an abscess part by part, and bound it tight, then fill it with old cloth or woolen rags soaked in moisture, and bind it on the third day; then apply the ointment, and the dressing until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	If there is bleeding at the wound, apply cool and cold water and dress with moist cloth, and cover it with linen wrapped around many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bleeding persists, apply firm and gentle treatment and cure, and the powders that I have in your hands in this book, if it is winter and the wounds or abscesses are very nervous, so cover them with linen soaked in wine and oil hot; and if it's still inflamed and the wound is charred, if it suits you to do so, put on soft linen soaked in water and oil, or in hot wine and oil every third day, as we have said; and then remove the abscess and clean it, if it seems fitting, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	In order to know this surely, instruct the patient to examine it entirely when treating an abscess: for you have said how one should act before performing the treatment of an abscess, and here the chapter is.
des soros	of sorrows.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where cuts on the head come from small abscesses, and are of many kinds, such as those in cloth, like a mouse skin, and there is much of that sort.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are fat ones and those that are like poultices, where moisture is present, just like pus; and there are some that are hard and stone-like to cut into, without any doubt, unless the arteries cause a change.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the scars from the waist area are such that you should know all the instruments called "entremissoire", because of which they come into shape after, what is contained.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they do it from above down long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is empty, they scrape without leaving anything on the skin that contains that moisture, because it returns when you leave nothing there; then they plunge cotton in ointment Egyptian, if present; or water and cloth, and apply the wound, and let it rest until the next day; and those who are left overnight will correct those who are still present.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then when they reapply the cotton, just like before, the second day, and the linen, until you know well that it will not stay overnight; then treat the wound with ointment suitable to the patient, until they are healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscesses hold out not much fat, they make it according to this form, from top to bottom; and you apply ointments, and scrape all over, and put all your care of treatment on the shirt where it is; and if the arteries cause contractions, then do what I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do so with the abscess if it is a stone, and as you cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cut on the stone abscess and the moisture, if it is lighter, because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or the head are free from moisture, and of those I copied, which is a head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and cannot be broken; and if any one had been burned with it, it would have done equally well the wound as if it were a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or heads, whatever those which come with the head of children and the roots of the ears, cut them so that they are open all day until it comes out the bowel; and cure as needed.
des scrophules	Dead bodies
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times happen an abscess at the neck, and beneath the armpits, and in the groin area, and sometimes appear elsewhere on the body, and are very painful, and are stuck together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each body is in its proper place, as it was in the neck and under the armpits, as we have said; and there are many similarities of these bodies.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are also those that are malignant and will not obey the health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one therefore which you see of good disposition at the toucher, and is similar to the color of the flesh, and mute in every part, and not inflamed as on the neck or artery or vein, nor too deep; then it is fitting to copy it from above, and scrape off each part, and make them both lips like those of a healthy one, if you have need; as we have said about incisions of the neck. Be cautious that you do not cover the nerve or vein, and do not cut with sharp objects, lest the hand fail, and see too far ahead, that you may only copy what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	If you prick the vein or artery, and it will not stop bleeding, apply vitriol to the wound, or any powder that remains to stanch the blood, and hold the wound in place; and let it be so long as the abscesses are appeased, and the pain is mollified, and then start to dress the wound.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the swelling is gone, it will return to its original state, until you complete it; then choose a suitable index if it does not show small boils, cut and lance them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	If the root of a boil has great inflammation, it is not advisable to cut that boil at its root alone, but rather tie with a double strong thread, and let it fall off without causing harm; then apply the wound with Egyptian linen soaked in ointment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you scrape the entire scrophule, then it is fitting that you assemble the two lips of the wound and now close them, for there will be no remaining superfluity because of the great size of the scrophule.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	so it is fitting that you listen to the root of it and treat the furrow, and close it just as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that hold superfluity, let them bleed where they open up; and treat it as described before, according to the situation, then apply ointment and similar things, so that what remains of the corruption is purged away; and when the wound is thoroughly cleansed, apply ointment to heal, until it is fully healed.
de squinance	of ulcers.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient people spoke and said about the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	It is necessary for those who have hemorrhaged that the opening of the throat, which is called "epiglote", be avoided; and one should not do this because all the veins and the swollen flesh of the patient are at those places where they have made a sharp cut in the mouth, or in the throat or elsewhere.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the canal of the swollen flesh, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglote, that we cut it under three circles or four one small incision across between the two circles or according to the size of the incision in the suture, neither in the cartilage; and thus is preferred if there is no section of the epiglote because there will be no scar and the vessel will be long from it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	If the patient's joints are swollen due to pain, instruct him to extend his neck as far as possible, then cut the vein up until it comes near the elbow; and remove the swelling of blood, if you see anything, and then strike the vein, just like we have said; and it is proven by the section of the vein's blood that came out when the limb was broken, and by the voice's failure; and let the wound be covered with a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed because one doubts strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound at the vein, and pull out the entire skin with the cartilage; then administer medicines that make pus, until it is cured.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	All the more so since it is not done until the throat is completely swollen and the patient is pronounced dead and the defect in the tongue.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Instruct the patient to hold his tongue since he cannot speak, and breathe through the wound, and so it is kept from death; for the ancients command that they leave the wound open until the malady is passed, and it passes away in three days or four, and then they commanded him to sew up the wound and cure it, until it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young maiden took out her knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut off part of the neck; and I was called to cure her, and I found her also dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found out that blood had come from it; and I realized that she hadn't cut a vein or inserted a needle anywhere but the throat, and the blood came out of there through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I have failed to translate the text.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cyst or abscesses are called "throat hernia", and it's a large cyst in the color of jet, and it is often found in women; and they occur in two ways: by nature and by accident; for if it occurs naturally, it has no knot.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident occurs in two ways: because one is like fat tissue, and the other is like an abscess coming from an artery; and there is fear, and it's not advisable to apply hot fires to anyone who is thin, but rather prove them and search at all the surrounding area: if you find it as fat as I mentioned, and do not seek a vein, then cut it as one cuts flesh, and follow its entire shape, if there is no point; and thoroughly search for it, and cure it as needed, until it is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways in which they (the bones) are united, of which I will speak all the similarities; and it is necessary that I tell you the difference between them (the bones) and their fracture.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that when the fever and the swelling remain as long as the bleeding has not stopped, and is accompanied by putrefaction; then the fever and the swelling will subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	But without a fracture, there is no swelling, fever, or pain, and it contains the abscess, which are its own sacs, and begin to swell in proportion to the size of the body, and become similar as if they were like a jar, and grow; and are similar in color, weight, moisture, and texture, just as I said in division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is fitting when you come to the treatment of this disease that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments called "entromissoire", as their form will become clear.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way to inquire about the abscesses is that you prick or moisten it with a quantity of fluid you find in the abscess, and turn your thumbs slowly until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then pull out the "entromissoire", and be careful not to burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the pus is cut, as it has color, do so as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the "entromissoire" does not come out with moisture, know that it is fat, then cut into a cross, and take hold of it with pincers, and lightly scrape off each part and wear a cloak where it lies, so that you may treat the wound clean with the nose; and if you cannot do so, pull it apart into pieces so that it does not stay there.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it stays in place, then it will revert to its former position many times; and if it remains for a short while without causing any harm, apply the wound with some corrosive powders, and tie the wound, and put on soothing substances near the abscess, and cure other treatments until it is healed; and if it becomes large, cut two fingers off from the wound, and cure this one who causes inflammation.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein bursts against it or another substance if you hasten and apply the lead of vitriol broken, let him lie for two days or three, until the wound becomes clean, and rests on the convalescence of the blood; then return to covering that which is left untouched.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of entranced tumors, and they come in three kinds: great, medium, and small; and among them there are three quarters called "albaret", and one called "breb", and they also come in three kinds: large, medium, and small, to enclose fistulae apertures; and they are like the needles with which you sew suture wounds, made of citrin (gold), iron, or silver, and move as if they were yellow, because they are more suited for closing the black spots of fistulae; and come in three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the width of the perforations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of tumors are of many kinds, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if tumors have two bodies in three ways also; and if tumors that have three bodies, and are so in three ways; and if tumors with two bodies, and single body only, and are so in three ways; and all this is necessary for their treatment.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these is cut to make them sharp, and of such kind are those which do not cut through only one side, from which one must burn the skin, because you cannot lance the vein or the nerve; and of these hidden kinds are the swallowed lemons in handbags, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses; and they come in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one should not use only to cut for more than to treat with a chariot, like legs, arms, and nipples, and veins, and similar limbs; and sometimes another little instrument is made, resembling the cuts of fistulas, according to this shape, when it stains the vein.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put him on no occasion to the healthy vein which has bled and is swollen, and at some times it will recover according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen when they begin to be corrupted, such that they resemble a woman's breasts; and they remain inflamed and swollen, and whoever tries to cure them must follow this form along this line from b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape the fat, and apply a medicinal poultice made with char, then bring together the two lips of the wound at the seam, and treat until it is healed; and if the nipple droops down, and is swollen like a woman's breast, so that one lies on top of the other, as it did when they were whole, because one fits into the other up to the end of both, such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form, from line b to g; then scrape off the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and poultices, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed; and if it does not heal, or the incision has not been made all the way through, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the corruption of the wound, then it is advisable to apply a poultice of soaked cotton cloth in corrosive ointment; and let it sit until it makes its way out and the fat, then cure until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses at the opening of a vein
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from under the nails are hard swellings or where there are boils, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from the line .b. just above the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are empty, apply a poultice of old cloth to the wound and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cloth and treat with ointment as needed until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to a boil, treat it as we have said in incising boils, and if the wound bleeds into a vein, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	About the cutting of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut and the skin is sewn over it, if there are many abscesses, and just as often the vein flies out and an abscess; and if you notice a lump when it's for the artery, there are long abscesses under it; and when you feel it with your two hands, you will feel constriction; and when it's for the vein, you will see many swellings appearing; and it is folly to cover up this abscess, and even so when it is located below the joints and the sinews and at the neck and full of other swellings, and there are great ones.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is then necessary to remove the iron cure, and those who are at head must be treated similarly, and in one who has an abscess of the artery cut through the skin for a long time; then sew the waist tightly, and carefully separate the artery from the flesh; then pull out the bowstring until it is freed; and put a dressing on that, so that the wound will heal; and if the abscesses are under the vein, it is necessary to tie them with a string of two fingers, as I have told you in the extraction of two arteries in the temples; and if you doubt that the strings do not come loose, then put another needle into all the string over the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the strings in four fingers; then cut off the abscess until it is freed, then cut off the surrounding flesh and leave what is tied; then put a moist cloth on top of the wound, made from wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses of the intestines.
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also when abscesses come into the artery and vein, they come into the intestines because of being cold, or from excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and joints where there are fractures, and it's a source of abscesses, and its color resembles the color of flesh, and is more prone to disease with pain; and when it's strained tightly, they feel pain, and aren't made better by being bound tight to the body, but worse under the joint; and they fall ill in all parts, and don't go forward or backward, neither above nor below, and those with fractures should not be covered with iron: because perhaps there will be a contraction; and those who are on the head or forehead tie the cloth around it.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if you have a pair of pliers and cut it at its root; and if it is large, if it is suspected to be an abscess under the skin, make incisions, and scrape away, then clean and dress the wound along the bone, and let the cure continue until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	of large boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never does it occur in the belly and not another part, and it is a disease called "fungus" by resemblance to an abscess, and its subtle roots, and large pus; and there are small ones as well as great ones; and I saw one man who had two bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and were split open, and rotted away due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	Inscribe and find in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI ounces, and observe the work of the incision so that you see if the patient is moist, and the color of the arthritic joint is pale and wet and has subtle roots; if you cut with a broad spatula, and be present while applying cauterization to fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in cutting comes often too great bleeding of blood, and if you do not prepare yourself, then hasten to cauterization; and if you see the patient fearful and full of anxiety about the incision with iron, then take a thin thread well-made, and tie the joint as we have said, and let it be for two days; and then reset it, and do not cease to tighten the thread until it pierces the joint, and cut through it with sensation; and if the roots are large, then be afraid to pierce oneself directly in the stomach, but you can well pierce half of it, then cauterize so that it does not come back; then cure the wound, and watch that you do not pierce the tender part which is of red color and poor sensation and with raw sight.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	This is an enchanted abscess, and I came to this cure for the chancre after.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil bursts
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery for a wound or cut on a vein, and it is located on the abdomen and has some boils, similar to other cases where there is rupture, such as through an abscess or a puncture; or if it's due to bleeding from veins or arteries according to what is in front of it, or from frostbitten areas; and if this is by the cut of the vein on syphilitic skin, then similar color to the color of the body, and lighter than pain, with diverse discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when one presses on both sides so it comes back, and then goes again, and by chance if it is healed, and becomes larger at the entrance of the bath for strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It seems you forgot to provide the original text to translate. Please provide the next sentence, and I'll translate it for you.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, just as I told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the gall bladder, so instruct the patient to pull on their abdomen, and be stretched straight, then sew around the wound; then command them to rest in your hands, then go towards the spot where you have marked it, then cut the half of the abscess above all the great incision; then bind it tight with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk firmly, so that the abscess is bound like an animal; then sew the half of the abscess extended on top of the thread, and pour your medicine into it, and choose the intestine; if you find the intestines tied to the thread, untie them, and pour the intestine away from the belly; and if you find the gall bladder, if it hurts with an ounce, then cut off its surplus; and if the vein makes a cross-ply effect, or the vein, so go straight towards it, then return to your work and take 2 needles, and pierce them into those spots where you have pierced; then draw out the abscess four times above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb be still until it heals itself; or cut off the dead part by its own virtue; or when it has come to subtilty and healing, then cure according to what is necessary, and sew the abscess as we have said; and take out the sanc or the moisture that you find, then cure the limb of what it needs, and close the limb.
dou chancre	A wound
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division of chancre, and how to treat it with medicines, and how not to use iron treatment; and we say that chancre inflames the breastbone, and great caution is needed in its treatment; and the ancients said that when chancre appears on someone who can be cut near the navel, as a breastbone chancre does, or in the groin, and similar places, and it should be entirely removed when it first begins to show up; but when it grows large and old, you do not need to approach it, for I have never seen anyone cured from this condition; nor has anyone else ever been cured from it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the wounded ones, when they are in the place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you never purge the sick person of black bile; then make them healthy if they show signs of repletion; and after, treat the wound to make the patient well; then apply your poultices or chancre, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the wound fully bleed, and take good care that the patient is healthy in your hands or with anything, and if they bleed from the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize as long as there is no stain; then treat them with another treatment until they are made whole.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division of symptoms that there are similar signs of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each one, and the treatment done with medicines, and the one cured by iron: if it is opened alone; and you should not touch with iron in these two similarities: this means tympanites and yopsarche, because they are a deadly thing; therefore when you do the medicine for this similarity called "eclites" of medicine, and the cure does not profit, look at whether the patient is weak or has another disease than dropsy, as fever and constipation and similar things; if you don't touch with iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient strong and he only has dropsy alone, and he is neither too old nor too young, then do this: lift the patient straight up on your hands, and the assistants press the belly towards the bottom of the abdomen, pushing out the water to its lowest part, then take the spatumile (a long, thin instrument) with a thorny end according to this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let them cut two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Cut with a point and make sure it's not too close that it can come inside the intestine when you insert it; otherwise, it will cause bleeding. Then check if the dropsy is gathered towards the intestines: if so, cut into the third part of the vein on both sides above the artery; and if it's due to liver disease, cut on the left side of the third part; and if it's due to ulcers, cut on the right side. And make sure that the patient does not apply pressure on the cut wound so that the superfluous fluids do not flow to a weak spot in them; then pierce the whole skin with the instrument, pour out, and tie tight your hand around all the spatumile between the skin and the vein as if you were scraping when cutting to the amount of an inch or two; then pierce the vein until the spatumile is four fingers long, and that's the size of the juice; then take it out, and pour this instrument with which this shape is made.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it seems like a chain of silver, and is made of iron or of an arrow lightweight, and in the lower part there is a small hole; and on one side there are three holes, and two on the other, and one on the other; and the head is cut so like a feather, and this is the form of the incision that the scribes shape the feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the head above is the marrow, so that when the instruments approach the water, it now comes out from the instrument; empty then half or a third, because if you empty more than what is needed in that hour, by chance he may die of the resolution of his spirit with the arrow, or he coughs or approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of his virtue signify to the patient, and his feet; then take up the instrument and hold back the water, because it is held now by the pressure that blocks the hole above on the cheek, which I have spoken of, so that you pierce according to this manner; then resume the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering such, and extract a small quantity of water; do this one day, and beware not to be foolish until he no longer requires but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you doubt the patient, and let them drink much water, then take the cure of burial or hot sand, and after a great sweat or bath and in the sun, and make them drink beer; and treat with medicine desiccative until they are healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the hemorrhoid.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is ever born without a single defect in the rectum, or if there is one it's small, and it does not fit its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If they wish to pierce it immediately, so that they do not feel pain throughout the entire rectum, very subtle and according to this shape.
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Instruct the patient to put or cut out the wound from its source, and bind it and tie it in this manner for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, cut open the closed part, make him urinate, and then release it; and by chance it does not fall off, because the urine that comes forth does not let loose the closed part.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If it is of the foot and there is a cut, then apply medicine to the cloth, as we have said, and it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the cut in their own place are pale, because no one is born with a cut on the head of the penis, since they cannot urinate until they raise their penis up; and they cannot defecate because the matter cannot come down to the anus, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to lie on his back, so that the chief of the instrument (verge) rests on his spine, and then the head of the rod is placed and struck as if it were the size of a pinhead, just as it should be; and take care not to make any incision when bleeding often comes, and if it happens, then tighten the one that causes bleeding, and cure the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	from the head of the rod (verge) due to pus.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	There are times when cysts appear on the rod, and it's a foul appearance, whether good or bad; so you should pick them off one by one with great subtlety, cut them all open, then apply cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment, and treat with diafinicon ointment until they heal.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the humors are malignant, of a putrid color and smell, it is advisable that you apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have applied it, and the humors are in the belly, and some of them are inside the skin and some outside, it is advisable to remove the humors that are inside first; and when it is soothed, if the wound is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you are treating it altogether, make sure the joint of the vein is not perceived, for if it is not, blackness and corruption come to the vein and the spot; so it is advisable to remove all that which is black and corrupted, then tie up the plaster made of honey and flour which is made from the rind of sour plums and vinegar, then apply other treatments until it is sane.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a swelling comes, then apply lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterization is helpful in two conditions: it is to see swelling and corruption; and if the head of the finger is swollen and drawn back, so that you put or apply a linen bandage around it, and let the patient urinate; and when the hair over the head of the finger has dried up as in those who have not been circumcised, because of wound or abscess, then therefore it is advisable to scorch with a hooked instrument at the top of the finger, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the finger is freed from all parts; and if this is a painful thing to do, then it is advisable to scorch with a small spatula under the chin of the finger and hair. Then carefully apply two bandages, and put a subtle linen cloth soaked in cold water between them, so that the discharge comes directly.
de la circoncision	About circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a source of continued illness like other wounds; it can be done whenever we choose, and is especially necessary for children, because it is their best and most gentle treatment.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	They did not say that circumcision should be done on their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we know by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have taken the greatest part of the masters and physicians who practiced circumcision in school, with forces, and with great experience; so they would say it was better because it had two stitches, and by chance someone hit those above and kept that one below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	For the recovery of health, it is certain that there is double pain and at the cleanliness which is not secure the point of the member; and at the cleansing of the wound by chance escapes the iron, and overflows the vein, and many times happen so they do not need further cleansing.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the cleanliness which is made with force all along the entire length of the thread I have found the good luck of the experiment, because the forces cut exactly both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, the cuts are equally straight in all directions; but if the thread is tied tightly around the skin; and the manner of the first operation is such that you think about what the child sees, if they see it, do not make a difference between tying the thread around the vein solely, and making it slip away in various ways that you can; then take the hand straight down onto the vein and breathe on it, and hold out your hand so that the stitches of the vein are exposed; then clean it well from the dirt that is gathered there; then tie a new signet with a double thread, then tie it underneath one another thread; and keep two threads by the second tied fast to the pouch and the toe index, and cut between the two threads, then tie the wound above hastily and pull up the head of the vein; then let the blood flow little by little, because it is the worst part; and put powder on top and powdered with rose water that is warm and moist, congealed with good oil roset, and fresh, and leave it there till the next day, and cure with another cure until it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the force at purification is thus: let the two shoulders be tied and are being cut, and let the shoulders be as large as the elbow.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of purification is when the keys inside are found at the incision; so it must be extended to your angle, in such a way that the wound opens; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold to your angle, if you have clamps, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they persist for three days, and that which is below the vein is swollen, let it be left until the wounds are healed, and lightly scrape; and cut as you can move, and guard yourself from the part of the vein, lest it harm none.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure then the joint of such sudden pain caused by powder, which we have said or treated as powders, and if it is struck with excessive force, and it goes up, so it does not harm; cure it then, just as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	when retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	If the retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or gallstones, or similar things, which we have said in division; and if the urine does not come out, and you see that there is retention because of the stone lodged or near the neck of the bladder, then it is fitting to lean the patient on their knees; and put their feet upon the back, and make them stretch the belly from above the back, and restrain the patient until they can relieve themselves as much as possible; and thus constrains the neck of the bladder to expel the stone upwards, because the urine comes out; and if it does not come, just as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction for all the instrument called "siringue", namely: a silver thin leg like the feather of a bird, half a palm long, and subtle at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
des maladies de la vessie	De maladies of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorched things or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is assembled, and you see urine and medicine distill, then do this to all the instrument called "clepsedre", which is like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three perforations: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the leather straps because the medicine can be applied well to the tip until the wound heals, if possible, and when you put the medicine in the bladder, put the cover of the container in the moisture, and draw out from behind it; drawing out the moisture from behind, and then push the container forward; if the moisture enters the container, and comes into the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the subtle form of the clistere where one clisters the bladder:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et est d'argent ou d'archaut, and is the key more high; and below to I see where the ties are broken; then take a sheep’s vessel and put in the moisture that you see thickening the vessel, then tie between the two breasts of a good double thread, and heat it on the fire; then pour the head into the clotter in the stick, then strain your hand over the vessel until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the vein; and if you do not have the vessel, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce round about; then pour the strong thread in those wounds, then assemble the circle as one assembles wool, and put inside what you see oil and moisture and water, and tie in the instrument; and do so as you did with the vessel, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the vein.
de la piere	From the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division of stones, and the extraction of medicinal substances; and I said the differences between stone from honey and rain, and all signs, and in which stone one must operate with cutting; and in the bladder, and the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone in the bladder which is honey-like in the vessel occurs more often in children, and it's a sign that the water has burst forth from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and they bring out their kidneys, and excite the patient's penis, and cut them many times, and then swell up; and there are much swelling of the feet; and is lighter the healing of children until they are 4 years old, and is more painful in old age, and is like stone in those who are between youth and oldness; and the cure is lighter for those with a large stone than for those with a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary to first purify the patient by cleansing, so that all the filth which is in his intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	But it blocks sometimes when trying to take out the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and push him downwards, so that the stone comes out to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it falls down to his chest; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his knees, so that the bladder is entirely inclined towards you; then look and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, take now and cut on top of the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall out at the toucher (the stone's edge), then apply to the first finger of your left hand with oil from that same finger on your right hand; if the patient is sick, or on your right hand, if the patient is a young man accomplished; and pour it into its foundation, look for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, press towards it at the base of the bladder; then press with all your might until you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands him to extend his right hand fingers up high, and to hold his left hand fingers under the nails, where they are covering the area where the operation is performed; then, he pours the spatula mixture into this form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And it is placed between the nails and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the left shoulder; and it should be straight above the stone, and both ends near the foundation, and it should be cut through the flesh so that it is wide at the top and narrow towards the bottom, according to the size of the stone, neither too large nor too small; by chance the pressure may cause one of the bones in the foundation to break loose during work; and observe whether there is part of the stone with angles or edges: if it sticks to come out easily.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For the angles and margins of this cut, make the incision larger; and if it doesn't cut, it is to be strained with the nails as sharp as a knife on the forehead, so that you strain the bone so that it does not escape; or you pour through the subtle instrument curved at the head; and if you cannot do it in this way, expand your poor body, and if it has not been cut off, strain with vinegar; and if it has more than one bone, first put the largest into the neck of the bladder, then strike above, then pull out, and the small ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it should be sewn on and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For these two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out again because the stitches cannot hold; but in any case force yourself to treat, or to debilitate the nails, until you sew it piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with resin of dragon, aloes, and bloodstone, and bind it, and place above a moist cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to calm the burning abscess; then revive the patient on his back, and do not unbind the stitches until three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release it, so that the limb moves very well again, apply oil and water to it, then bind with linen thread or gauze, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come into the wound and cause corrosion and frost of blood in the bladder, and it is retained there because of urine congestion, which is known in this manner that without urine: put then your poultice on the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, the bladder will corrode, and rot; then lift up the wound with water and asphodel and salt, and help him with all the ways you know, until he is healed; and it is fitting that all the treatments you give to him, tie his two legs together, and assemble those medicines on the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	In case the piercing is small and it has come out of the rod and stuck, and urine cannot come out; so if I say again to you that you must measure it many times, then excuse yourself from this measurement for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this way.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron of this shape and fix three holes in the girdle.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and tie it around the rod under the stone, so that it cannot come out after in the bladder; then push the iron into the rod lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the iron by hand to the other side of the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone on the other side; if it comes soon afterwards, then press your hand upon what is left behind of the stone that is inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken now and flows with urine, and the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie I finger below the bone and I another above, then make the spear point towards the bone between the two ligaments, then draw back, and release the ligament, and clean the wound which has congealed in the injury; and care for him until he is cured.
de la piere des femmes	of a woman's bone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that a bone is incarcerated in women, and if it has ever happened, the cure is difficult, and is forbidden by three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that we cannot find a woman who knows how to expose herself with mirrors, especially when she is cast down.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If it is swollen, so it should be moved from the entrance of the bladder to the under part, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then strike on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the bone, where it is moved around, and feel the bone in that part; and do not move the dog above or below the bone, and let it be tied to the first part small; then pour hot water into the size, if you feel the bone so close to the wound as long as the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have holes.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it is not swollen, then apply vitriol paste to the affected area, hold for an hour until it is stained; then return to your work, until the stone comes out, and you have the substances that I told you in the extraction of stones from men to help you in your work. And if it is not swollen, and it's a vein that has been cut, apply powder on the patient and the strained tulle and bandages, and do not start again, let the stone be left alone, lest the patient die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the wound is calmed, and the pulse is good again, he returns to his work, until the stone is cleared.
de hernie carnouse	of outward hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	It is nothing but a collection of moisture or white suture, which is under the knee, and contains blood; and it's called "suture", and sometimes it's not properly attached to the skin if one thinks it's something else; and it's the cowhide of the joint between the white suture that we've said; and such things do not happen unless one has suffered.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the growth of this suture is weak that it comes to the joints, and spreads out that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it's color declining to yellowish, or it's without red, or black, or white, and there are more of such; and these are the signs of recognizing this collection, because if it is the suture we've said, then it's the abscesses returning, for a short time like the shape of an ear, and it doesn't open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	If he has moisture in his own skin, then the abscesses grow with a part of the flesh; and so it is thought to be another wound; and if the moisture is between the hide of the thigh and the white skin, he feels pain well; therefore, when you see that you should exercise caution on all the surrounding area, for this is what has come before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Therefore, those who come after the surrounding area judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we cut with iron, it is fitting that the patient be healthy according to our power and the replenishment of his body; then place on his back, on one point a little high, and let him lie down heavily; then sit above his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two costs of the thigh; then take the spatulate, clean, and cut the skin of the thigh from its long joint until its white flesh, and make a straight incision along the skin of the thigh up to the joint, and carefully scar it according to our power; then perforate the white plain with water to a large puncture, and extract all the water, and then put your nails, and stand the white flesh upward; and do not touch the skin of the thigh, but only the white flesh, cut it throughout or in pieces equally, so that if you do not cut well, he will return the blood; and if the flesh falls into your work, put it back on its own joint when you have completed the perforation of the white flesh; then assemble the two levers of the thigh skin to a costure, and cure as with other wounds, until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you find the corrupted blood of another disease, it is fitting that you should tie off the vessels that are suspended above, doubting the decrement of blood; then strike the clot at all the suspended area, and extract the blood, and treat as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the wound is assembled in two parts into one assembly, knowing that they are two branches; then strike the other part as you did the first equally, and bleed the blood, and put a moist linen in the wound soaked in rose oil; and put apart another linen soaked in wine and oil, and place over the two clots, and cover with double draperies, and tie it above to all the thread that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take the two draperies and apply them according to this resemblance and are assembled by sewing in the throat of the braies, and one of the knees is pulled upwards on the ground behind, and the other towards the elbow; and another two above the two armpits, and the whole assembly is tied together in a bow around the waist; and sometimes this branch of cautery is given in place of iron binding, where you take a fine surgical saw, and strike the flesh of the clots, and burn as we have said so that the white substance contained in the blood is revealed; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the clot with needles, and scorch with this subtle cautery hot:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	Instruct the patient to look at it all sorts of ways while you examine; and be careful that fire does not touch the eye; and know that this work is more safe; and be cautious of accidents of blood and wounds; and if no other thing troubles you, or an abscess on your hand or wound or another thing, cure what troubles you, according to what has been said beforehand.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	But if the patient is afraid and does not want to endure this work due to its horror, perforate it as I have said, and because when you are certain about the water's meaning, just sit the patient upright on the high bed; then pierce the abscess in the lower part all over the wide space, and make the perforation deep into the body; and if the wounds are large enough so that all the fluid can flow out, then put cotton on the wound, tie it up, and let it drain the remaining fluid for a while, then treat until the wound is healed; and if the scab will not come out of the mouth of the wound, it's necessary to insert a needle or the instrument used to treat dropsy, as before, because that form is what we have previously described; and enlarge the wound a little bit, and know when the fluid returns, and gets assembled after six months or sooner, and just like before, so will the patient pass its days.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of an abscess of the joints
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Seeing in the section of this branch that there is fear of many deaths, because it seems to be worth not cutting; and I will tell you about the work and the signs of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that most abscesses come from the body, and to the joints, and this happens in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to be known that this happens because of superfluous acid and water that spreads to the joints, or through percussion; and the color of the abscess corresponds with the color of the body; and there is no pain, but it's an abscess causing a trouble; and sometimes these are grievous and piercings, with a foul color, and never comes from elsewhere than an artery, or swelling of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is not caused by an artery, so it is found by the shape of the abscess, when you press on your two fingers; and it does not happen that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	This one that is formed by an enlargement of the vein is found by its shape at the point where you touch it gently with your two fingers; and one can easily make the size increase on this appearance, and on other swellings; and thus you should cut the exact spot on the swelling, then stand the edge up high, and remove the suspension from all parts of the edge.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the vein is already swollen with those swellings, then it is necessary to treat the vein and make the cut; and if there is any area swollen at the surface, or inside the vessels, it is necessary to release that entire area and make a round cut.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the hair grows at the head's back on you, then it is fitting that you copy it all, and extract the root, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are completed, apply the dressing of woolen cloth moistened in oil rose and wine, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the tonsils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess that has burst from an enclosure similar to the gallbladder, with the softening of the tonsils, and the patients suffer greatly when it appears; and the treatment for this disease is as near to fear-inducing as what was previously stated, and we will tell you about its work according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	Instruct the patient to sit on the elevated siege and then let him pour the suspensory over his shoulders, up to his elbows, down the arm, and outwards; so that the masters may see them extend; then strike with a spatumile cutting large through the place, until they are uncovered, and then scrape from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are at temples; then put an awl or where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first joint or where the vein has come, and tie directly to the other shoulder; then strike straight on, according to the length of the body, and get rid of the corrupting moistures; then cure the wound as the others do, so that none of the vessels might bleed again; for by this there will be no harm, and all the vessels come forward if you take care of them, so it is fitting to treat all the vessels.
de la routure dou syfac	Of a cut from the skin
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The dangers of this wound come from the section that comes out through the skin, or from the extension on the belly in the region of the navel, because the intestines descend from that wound to one of the joints; and this wound is either from the section or from the extension, and both come from two types of causes: either from striking, jumping, burning, or lifting a heavy load, and by similar things; and there are signs when it comes to an extension of the skin wound, which are that they appear little by little, over a long period of time, and do not happen suddenly; and the abscesses are equal in size until the end, because the skin wound presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it comes to a section of the skin wound that brings sudden pain from its beginning, and the abscesses have different appearances under the skin, close to the flesh, because they come out through the intestine and from the body at the site of the skin wound.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes from that place with the intestine, it is retained in the bowels, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it presses.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments with fear, because one must beware of them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of opening is such that you command the patient to tie his intestine in his hand inside the wound if it can be drawn out; then sew on his collar between your hands, and lift up the knees; then apply the knife to the top, and cut through all the skin down to the bone; then pour into the veins an amount of linen wool according to what you have need for to open the wound, so that it may come out; then scrape off the flesh that is under the skin of the bones, until the white skin is revealed from all parts; then put your right index finger into that which follows the bone, between the white skin that is under the skin of the hoof, and between the second skin; and pull with the main hand inside the wound to the knife of the bones, and lift up the hoof along with all its skin towards the belly; and command the minister to extend the hoof upwards, and release what is behind the knot; ask whether there is any intestine wrapped around or white skin dry, and if you find nothing, pour it into the belly underneath; then take a needle or one with a thread made of four threads, and put it in the back part of the skin, which is after the skin of the bones; after the belly, then cut through the tendons that appear from the thread, until there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the skin with a strong bond of two parts; then pull out the threads, and tie them together again with two parts, so that none of the servants who suckle you can enter into your body, lest there come worms to you; and put the bond directly according to the first bond long two doves of it, and after all, another according to the rounds that the hoof carries; then cut in the part under the skin of the bones, until without flesh or bone, as we have said before; then apply soft wool linen soaked in oil to wounds, and put it inside, and put the bond which we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes we cautery the white flesh to what we have said, after the incision, by doubt of blood coagulation.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and let the ligature be tied to what it sticks to; and if it lingers in the wound, so that it may come loose; then rise up from the cold water, and apply the same thing as we have said, until it comes loose. Then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a flesh hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this matter I have never seen anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done in this way: as if you tie a ring to the nose, in such a manner that you fasten the straps after the head, lightly downwards, then strike me, and treat the abscess of what hurts, until the straps come loose; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit,
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When you strike the hair, if it muffles and stops the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphilitic is constricted, and has no appearance in the operation, and the cautery is more muffled in this place, and closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening of the skin at the joints.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the joints is softened in people, because the chars inside are softened and can be seen, and it's a matter, when one wants to treat it, one must make the patient lie on his back, and strike the soft skin on top of the natural skin; then join the two lips with sutures, and see if you want, cut through the stitches, and the cure as in other wounds, until he is healed, and the flesh falls off.
dou chastrement	Let the cautery of fire command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that cautery is forbidden in our law, and it pleases me to not speak of it in this book; and it needs only two ways: one way is that the barber should answer questions when asked, and know the cure; and the other way, because we have often needed cauterization for some animals to help us, such as oxen and sheep and goats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that cautery is done in two ways: either by attraction, or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the way that we make by attraction, we sit the best in warm water, until the flesh is softened and done with it; then prick them with your hand, until they are removed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: it is necessary that you tie the bestiary, and press the skin of the chest against your left hand, then suspend the above, and strike on each one to a certain number, when you have well scorched them; and leave any small spot of flesh uncovered, and subtle flesh that is under the vasa; and this manner of chastrement is more gentle than that which is done by attraction, because at the attraction some thing may stay among the fingers, because the bestiary desires luxury. Then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	A hermaphrodite is in two manners of houses: one is that between the two sexes are open like the figure of nature of a woman, or he has hair, and at no time does he have any urethra.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And thus another manner is in women, and has on the finger like a spike and also two points.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cures for fever and famine are that you copy the joined limbs all, and cure as other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine springs from the skin of the finger points, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the pustule
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A pustule is a joined limb on the natural part, so long as it is ugly to see; and some women have it even larger than one hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary to dye the superfluity of the pustule with your hand or on some part, and cut it lightly; and do not go too deep, lest blood comes forth from it, then the cure is in other cures until it is sane; and for another wound that has been in the mouth, the cheek, and perhaps has sprouted, which resembles a cow, and thus they call them "cow disease", the ancients.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary to copy it, as we have said about the test, and the treatment until she is healed.
de erratique	of errors
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	There is error when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the part is lost; and it is due to her birth, or an accident by illness that occurred during delivery; or if it's because of a fall, or a sharp stab, or something done deeply in the vagina, abdomen, or elsewhere, and it prevents conceiving, and childbirth, and sometimes the flowers (i.e. the menstrual period) come; and knowledge of this is acquired through observing pain in the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If there are signs of hemorrhage near the exit, choose either your right or left side.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is thin and splits into two halves close to the two fingers, which are near the two-lever marks, then hurry up and do this: place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs; then straighten the two-levers until they are firm, so that the thin cuts split, and the ointment sticks well to it; then take flax, oil, and the mucus in it, and put it on the limb, and let the woman stay at home every day, so that she cannot rejoin.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the cut is hard and thick, it is better to sew it with a small instrument resembling a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the ointment is of black iron, put on a poultice and sew it; and apply the medicines stained with blood, as we have said before, equal parts of vinegar, dragon's blood, incense, and oil; then bring in a large cloth soaked in wine, so that the wound cannot close; and thus be done for a long time, and put on a linen sheet to cover it; then cure with other remedies until it is safe.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the arrow is found on the body, so it must be covered according to this manner; if it's not a poison in the arrow.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For when there is poison in the arrow that is in the body, one should not touch fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that do not usually occur, and when they become old, they swell; and we have said in the division the signs and appearances, and I will tell you which ones respond to a cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that hemorrhoids and the swelling occur when they are inflamed in the body, and if you don’t notice by feeling them, it's only with iron treatment.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the mare, can be felt, those can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then test her at the altar with nails, and cut them at their roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, if it soothes and stops the bleeding, like dragon’s balm and incense, and similar things; then pour water into her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and when she stops bleeding, take her out of the stew and make her sit on a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds and gall, and with flour and honey, and let it set on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If it is so, if they make hot air vents on the back and harm the nipples; then take linen, and apply the pus in the juice of plantain or in the juice of angelica with wine vinegar, and let it dry on the patient.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is covered up, so that it seems to have healed just like I said; and if the "albathir" appears, which is red, and resembles a rough head, then they must cover it just as I've told you; and then let them cure until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses from the marrow.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come from the marrow, such as carbuncles and pustular abscesses and herpetic lesions and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I mentioned in the divisions.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I say in this treatment the abscess that comes into the marrow, which is not an abscess that only forms bowels; and if you wish to see its origin by iron cautery, then examine if the abscesses are present at the beginning of its arrival, and filled with heat and fever, and if it becomes red then you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not pierce immediately, but let the pain be eased for as long as possible; and then place the patient on a stool, with two petis sieges or so that he can recline, and support his back and assemble his feet towards the lower leg; and make his knees spread out, and put his arms under his shoulders, and tie them well with a good bandage; then take the ball from over the right side, and insert it into the mouth of the marrow, because this comes after; and it is necessary that when you see insert this instrument, that you poke it in first to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters the instrument does not go more deeply than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with cloths, so that the instrument does not trouble the patient; and it is necessary to put the horn of the instrument on top, and bend the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is covered with gauze, it is advisable to avoid applying iron cauterization, but treat it as we have said in division.
de l’enfantement	of birth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The art begins first with the woman knowing the shape of natural birth, and the signs if you see her press down to relieve the pain, and desire to fart: then hasten the child to come out quickly; because as soon as it comes out headfirst, the second part comes out with it, and is cleansed by good cleansing of its superfluities; but what comes in another way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	When it happens to him, and comes upon his feet, and comes at the body or the head, or the hands, or it comes up to his belly, or sovain, and is transformed by chance on his neck, and by other bad forms; then it is necessary for the barber that he be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how one must help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes to sit on his head because of natural causes, and the woman in labor is in great pain, and the child's virtues are weak, then if he is placed on a stool or women hold him; and if the oil or fenugreek is cooked according to its nature, and then they pour the balm between his two eyelids with the small spatula which is this shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	Instruct the patient to cut the second joint and strike it so that the moistors who are in its place burn; and take hold of the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is advisable to cauterize the woman with muscillaige of fenugrec with olive oil of sivement; then make her eat and vomit condisi, and keep her mouth and nose shut for an hour: thus will the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out, so it is advisable to gently press them one by one; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on the couch, and lift her legs upwards; then pull up the couch upon earth, and take care that she does not fall off the falling out; and if the hands do not enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands with the knife which was previously placed there, and extract the child, and press them evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the issue of the child after its feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes to stand on its feet, if it is wished to make it higher, then gently push it up a little at a time, until it is even; and afterwards take hold of the foot and extend it a little at a time.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it can jump as soon as the cubs, if he commands to take hold and make it throw up its clothes; if it jumps, then God will help.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, if he is turned a little at a time, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be more easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take muscilliage from high, and oil of sament, and gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put on the nature of a woman inside and avoid this ointment, then put him in water cold until beneath the ribs; and when he is moistened below, they will make a cord of iron, and put it on him, and let one hour pass; then sit him on a stool, then make him throw up and hold his mouth and his nose, and take the belly lightly, because now the child jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child over its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this shape, if it makes small movements with its belly, then it settles on its back, and lowers its feet downwards, and lies gans on its bed; and presses its hands into its chest, and pulls its knees towards its abdomen, and so softens them down, until it is made easier for the child to come out; and if the child does not push, he picks up its feet and moves them in form, then lifts the belly upwards, then butts with his fists; and eases it little by little; and commands the woman to press herself so that the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the child which comes out with a hand extended
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I believe it is necessary to reattach the hand: if you cannot reattach it, if she cannot stand, then let her rise and walk; if she cannot walk, let her lie on the bed, and straighten her knees; then apply the muscilage that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then sit her down on a stool, then study to reattach the hand; and ease the child according to its natural figure, and let it expel, and command that she press herself so that the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child on his neck, and has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards his back his mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I suppose that the baleen pulls its hand, then turns it little by little, and makes it lighter; and when it is even, put on the musk-like substance of altitude and oil, as we have said, then he commands that she move little by little; and when you have done this, sit her down on the seat, and command her to pull; and she will pull.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner all the time
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to be in this manner all the time, strike the vein at one's thumb, until the moistors are empty; and if they spit on his face and neck, strike from the mouth, so that it is not retained, and the patients die; then pour the child into a container, just as you have placed him so that he should be, and command to the woman that she pull herself at any time: afterwards, they will recover lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	From what the outcome of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Those who are born twins often occur, and sometimes not at all; nor do they occur more than three or four. This is no strange thing, and this has happened.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are a strange thing, and do not live if born with that name. I know this, that they are multiplied, and are bound to the womb, which is the seat of the devil; and sometimes they are born just as naturally as everyone else, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born seriously, then the care is as we have said, and let the subtle balance, make it quickly and lightly what she does; and do so as if their value were in saving.
de plusors enfans	More than others children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never are formed in the uterus I, II, III, IV, V, VI, or VII, or more than 15 times, and they all take the shape of an infant according to the size of the mother's abdomen, for it is possible that a similar thing may happen; so make them in this manner as it seems fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When treating the woman with the dead child or uterus, as I have said in the division, if no heat comes, and you are constrained to do surgery by hand; if it is fitting that you know whether the woman has a healthy disposition, and does not have an accident or fear of death; if it is fitting that she be confident on her back, and her hairs inclined towards her navel, and her legs raised; and her midwife apply two parts to it, or tie her to the bed so that she is not treated with the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the uterus with moist olive oil mixed with musk and fenugreek and linseed seeds, and anoint the biles of the belly with these oils and muskings; then pour them into the uterus lightly, then let it be poured one by one according to what is convenient for her, and take care that the child is formed as soon as it comes out on its head; if you fasten or prick or scratch in any place such as the ears, neck, mouth, chin, palate, under the beard, or near the breast, or on the sides, when the descent begins, apply an onion to her hand, and put a corbinder between her right thumb and left index finger, and pour it into all the places that we have said, until she comes out empty; and this is the form of the onion:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	For the second head is in another joint, or if you need to remove it, so that the extraction is equal; and then stretch it equally by moving one part and the other, so that the joints move, and the bone is held to make them hold, just like this is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it stays a part, apply some oil to some of his two joints, and pour them into that part, and treat the other part; and if it doesn't stay at all, put that bone in or higher than him, and do this as long as it comes out all red.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be drawn back for restriction, so you should cover with the drapery, until it comes out all; then strike at the joint of the foot or on the bone, and do this to both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l'enfant est gros il est estrouy en la issue ou il a le chief aigue assemblee si covient que tu bote le spatumile espinous entre tes dois et fent le chief et estray l'aigue ou tu la ront a l'estrement qui est apelez "almidach" de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapitres qui est aprés cestui
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, and there is a light attraction, and the address to the mouth of the maris is lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	Et s'il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l'estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; 
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If the child is on his chest and you can put him level, do as we have said for the living infant; and if they have no power, cut through with pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if they are laid as we have said on the caustic wounds that come into the mouth; and if bleeding comes out, put it in water and restrain, and lay them on other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman with child who had one of her babies dead, then consulted another, and rejected the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time one abscess came into the mouth and swelled so much that it burst, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was not able to complete the translation as I do not have any further sentences.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on plaster of strong attraction, and from it came out an osseous growth, and after a few other days.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was much surprised, for that belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it might be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I tried to find the wound and found bones, until the woman was made whole again; and for a long time she remained in that state, till a little bit of bone fell out from her; and I have remembered this chapter only because when my master saw an unusual thing, he would know how to administer aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	Let go of the marrows to their place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of pressing, by which we take away the books; and again to the two joints of the two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	All manner of horns must be made more subtle for the restrictor, and made of ivory or boxwood; and the mouth of this instrument should be twice as wide as before, and half an inch thick; and in both limbs there are two same-shaped wedges, firm one in each, about half a palm long, but not quite so; and these two wedges must be poured into the marrow's mouth to open when we turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, made to resemble it more subtly and lightly, is made of ivory or boxwood, in the shape of shears; and has two joints, just like you see them, half a palm long and twice as wide; and when you open the marrow with the entire instrument, put your wife on one side near the lit, her hands stretched out and her legs bent over, then pour both wedges together into the marrow, holding the head of the instrument between its joints; then open your hand to work the entire instrument, just as you have done with the shears equally, according to how much you see opening the mouth of the marrow, until it makes the desired movement.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all above, and its shapes are many; and when the fingers have prepared them, it is more swift to work, and higher in the house for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not prepare the instrument before cutting it, because their necessity is not justifiable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the umbilical cord is tied at birth, it is advisable to instruct the patient to tie up their navel, and then let it burst in its season, and hold tight your hands to the mouth and nose; and if she falls through this, it's good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that does not work, take the poultice, and make a burn or ulcer, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as camphor, anise, chamomile, saffron, and cinnabar; whether any of these are cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a cloth or burn poultice on one end, and another cloth in the mouth of the mare, and tie tight until the vapors come out of the mare's mouth; then let it burst, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If he has a swollen joint suddenly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure and is not free, instruct the barber to moisten his left hand with oil of sesame or muskillaige of aloe, and then put it in the nature, and make him wait for the swelling; and when he has found it, grasp it and stretch it little by little straight away, so that the swelling does not burst at extraction; but they must move lightly to right and left, and then strike; if it comes and bursts again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the swelling of the marrisa is tight and constricted, we have said to cure it by vomiting, and fumigation with herbs; and if she is not relieved from all that we have said, be careful so that you do not go mad while treating; but it is certain that what is at the mouth of the swelling should be bound to the woman's udder, then oint with tetrafarmacon oil; pour some more, and she will come out free; but beware, when she pours herself, if she comes up with a bad smell in her stomach and head, and the patient becomes sick.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is then necessary to perform fumigations, then let them be wholesome fumigations; none of the ancients have practiced fumigation with cresses and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumes the woman, is to hold back the flowers and the second hand if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is to look like a cauldron, and put the subtle head in nature, and let the keys wide on the fire; and so the fumigation above the embers, and the lice until they are consumed, and start again another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	But many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, instead they are suffocated by a subtle stitch: if this is then it is necessary to go to the bath that she pierces that stitch with her thumb, and not at all pierce from a sharp needle, and tie the bandage so that it does not touch; then put on a linen soaked in wine and oil, and apply poultice until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it won't heal, then cut off a vein on the elbow, and let the hands rest for a while, and leave open when the child wants to go to the chamber.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And at no time does it come to an abrupt stop in a wound or abscess; so one should cover the sudden bleeding: if so, treat it, just as we said for cutting off the vein on the elbow.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at its base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from under the base are nodules and swollen, just as those that come from beneath the surface of the two parts; and if there is one or more fistulas; and when this nodulation is old, it causes, and takes on moisture as it grows white or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas become inflamed; and they are known by the fact that they have emission or flatulence while the patient makes emission, and by chance some of them burst.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	If they have fistulas that come out from the bladder and from the middle of the penis; and reach as far as the joint of the thigh, and no further than the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula persists in the fundament, and does not persist; and it is that you put your finger on the foundation, and insert a subtle needle or iron into the fistula when there is no twistiness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twistiness, then you insert a subtle tent or horsehair plug, until you feel the tent or hair in your wound; and if you do not feel it, and no purging, ventosity, or discharge comes out, as we have said: seek to make it penetrate.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is inflamed until it reaches the bladder or just before the passage of the urine, then it swells and cannot be cured by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perceived at the joint of the crotch, if there comes swelling to the groin; if there is no twisting or invention of pain in that place, then they come again to the swollen part, and there is no relief from medicine or application of ointment. And in such inflamed fistulas there is no cure except labor, and foolishness of those who try to intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	For the one that is not inflamed and not old, there is hope for health by iron, as I have experienced; and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you lift his legs up to his groin, and incline his groins towards his belly; then pour a poultice of ash or plaster into it, if there is twisting, until you see when the poultice comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels something on their backside, then it is advisable to probe with your two fingers, if you feel anything then do not try to pierce it; and if you discover a wound or a scratch between your buttock and your chair, then know that it is painful. If you don't try to work at it, then it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	But it happens rarely that one can heal someone completely, but if you do aid them, then if you heat the cautery subtle according to the size of the fistula, as said before, and pour it all down into the fistula, until it comes out from the base; and make this twice or three times, until you know which of these are necessary to be burned off, resembling a small bird feather; and then apply soft linen pads soaked in balm, until those marks disappear, then apply ointment for oiling char and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus injured, it's well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is like that, he cannot be cured otherwise; and if he tries to enter between them and does not pierce just where the foundation is located and between your two sides there is a thick covering of hair or wool, and you see the fistula at the place covered with red blood; then if you cut from the beginning of the fistula and pour it out after the tenting, and cauterize afterwards, as long as it comes to the top of the tent; he will be delivered of the tent and cured. Then take away those hairs that are needed which resemble an owl's feather, and do not leave anything.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if he does not swell, and cuts between you and the wound, so that the cautery of fire or medicine is applied.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery, there are two things to assemble: namely, the arrow of these charred bodies, and the stretching of veins and the drying out of moisture; then treat wounds moistened in butter or in cheese broth, until they begin to harden, and let the bowels dry out, so that the arrows become hardened in the bowels; then cure the wound of sudden pains caused by arrow injuries, and are the drying medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	But when it is restored, if it is healed and does not come back.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess comes straight to the bottom of the deep root, and is located at the body, then put in two or three pounds of earth, and investigate.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the pulse and two of them are in contact with the skin or the face, or it is near to piercing, if there has been only fire through hope and expectation, by the guidance of one of three methods: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut straight into it, or if possible, put tents and cure as before; do not go too far down into the root, lest you cover the foundation that holds the base, and there be more painful movements on both sides due to volatility; then cure as we have said; by chance, if it heals, remove that covering and mind later when it is cut near the root, or through tent or another instrument specified; then find out what medicine this fault requires in the wound, until you can; then study how to restore the wound, and keep the fistula away from the side opposite the foundation: if it's a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this way; and it is when you blow into the tent, and it takes hold on the skin over the bone at its base, that a perception occurs according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And then I blow through the twisted thread in two places, and blow into the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is torn in the margin of the bone's foundation inside, then remove the twisted thread from that point, so that you blow into the bone again; and pull out the head with the thread, and assemble the two joints together, and join them to each other, and let one day pass or two; and restrain it once, as long as the threads are caught between two, and closed; then cure the wound until it is sewn and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not heal by piercing it in all ways that you can, then pierce it in every way possible if it is not too much for it.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not advisable to cover up the wound if it does not heal, and then treat it as we have said, until he is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny splinter which is cut to make the fistula, if it is much thicker in one part and more pointed; and on the other hand not so, for this you should not pierce at all, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are in two manners: or they are inside the fundament, like a grain of resin, and if there are small and large ones, and inside the skin with pus, and if one or more are present, and the fundament is outside; but those that are outside have little moisture, and cut off close to the seat, and have the color of flesh; and the cure for these who have them in the fundament, if you command the patient to strain on straw or cloth, until the fundament swells and comes out, and feels like thread; and then take out the nails, or hold with tweezers, or hold with one's thumb, and cut at the roots; and if they cannot be held by their moisture, then take them up with a cloth, or a piece of camel hair; and pull them out to the side, and then cut, and powder with hot powder that is in its place for cautery; or you cauterize as said in the chapter of cautery, since the cure of other cures until he is healed; and if the fundament cannot come out, then lather the patient with harsh soap and vinegar to open it up, if it can come out completely; when the patient feels it, and if the thread comes out from the fundament, it is a light cure; and take out the nails or cut them, and cure as we have said until he is healed.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is fitting to tie the stitches in this manner: take one thread, and sew it through, and then pull it up into an needle, and then take the thread above and pierce the needle on the other side, and twist the two joints of the thread below the needle, if it is not too thick; and tighten the thread, then loosen the thread, and draw out the needle, and do so for all the others, and leave one to stop the superfluity of blood; then put a moist linen cloth on the foundation of the wound in oil rose or cerote, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest; and then let him lie until he stops bleeding, and when he is cured, so that the cure of ointment and other cures will be sufficient, until he is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Until the blood or the wound dries out.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a sharp pain in the intestines, and due to the natural constraint, when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to reset at the point of a splint or on the angle of the scab above, which does not allow it to moisten; then treat as long as it is sound if it suits; and if it cannot be made sound, make the scraping stronger than before until it heals, and becomes scabbed; then treat as long as it is healed.
dou fremit	When it vibrates.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A mouse is a small, free appearance in the body, and goes to its root; and sometimes it gets stuck with frost, and feels like death from vibration, and appears all over the body, especially in the hands more than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Instruct the patient to take a cane made from an eagle's feather or a strong vulture's feather and place that cane on the pulse, until it turns purple all around; then turn your hand over the entire cane so you copy all around the purple, and put it in its proper place, and secure the pulse at its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, do as with a thorn or iron cane, and be subtle under and above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	don't cut, for it will hold in two, and press it, And if you see it, so cauterize the pulse, just as it is near the cautery on the book.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a splinter.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one ever uses a silver syringe or an arrowhead, or melted tin or clothing; and no one ever uses these small and large instruments, as they have brought upon themselves.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore these small instruments are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small syringe or larger one is such that it fits over a wide area, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and if there is a perforation or the belly is tied up, as you see, and the syringe is seen inside; and on one side it has a puncture, and on the other I; and some insert medicines into a cow's bladder or parchment, and some are perceived with small punctures; and between each puncture there must be an inch of space, then pour in these punctures with a strong thread that goes through the center, and sew together the belly like a pig; and when the medicine is inside, if it sticks to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then clamp; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And so instruct the patient to let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or wax of beeswax or something similar, then pour it in lightly; then press the ministers' hands on them together until all is well, then pull out the castor oil, and lift up the sick person's legs to show, and if the medicine comes out as it can, and he sleeps a whole night at once, so will be greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you castorize a person suffering from a decay of the belly and the medicine comes out quickly, then he will reoccur whenever it is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are on the fundament, or abscess, so that the castor oil is as subtle as for an infant; and this is the form of the subtle castor oil where the skin is strained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the cutting of wounds, the cure for wounds; or you will tell us the treatments for hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different according to what they are made of, and according to the place where or how the wounds are made, and for what reason they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Things that wounds are made of are because of a stone hit, cutting with sword and knife, or lance or club or quilt, or similar things; or what they are made for according to the parts of the body, if a wound is created on the throat, head, neck, shoulder, abdomen, liver, or similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each type of wound, and start with the simple wounds of the head because that memory will come back in his chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it's a fracture of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely ruptured and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly about an abscess: then make the patient recover from the cephalic themselves as soon as possible, if it came only from blood of the wound, and let them be treated in the opposite direction of the navel; and avoid that the sick person becomes replete with wine and heavy food.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it will not recover, if they are reduced in meat and do not drink wine, nor eat flesh; and put on the wound, if an abscess comes up then, apply cotton soaked in oil rose only, or in vinegar; and if there is no boiling abscess, then put a poultice on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and has not been disturbed by the air, powder, I will tell you about this later; and if it has moved, apply some ointments until they are cured.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great like a cut from a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be stitched together with threads, then they must be sewn together, just as I will say about wounds on the belly, of the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone and flesh, and holds together only with a small piece of skin if it's pressed; then cure the wound with medicine, and cover the bone with tough leather in its place, and command the patient to eat large fleshy meats, such as chicken and bread cooked, just as eggs and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find or leather that is rotting and it adheres only to the bone, when you pierce the whole of it and squeeze out the pus, then cure the wound; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be closed without a scar, and medicines do not help, then choose to cut the artery, and if you find it loose, tie it with a thread; and if this does not benefit, cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put on this powder which unites as well as the art has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is thus: take incense for one part; dragon’s blood two parts; calcined live parts; and the powder subtly, and apply the wound, and bind it tightly, until it dries well and unites with all its blood; and then tie it up well, and let it separate if it swells; because you do not take away the medicine until it is sound.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes only calcined is used alone, when you do not have the incense nor the blood of the dragon, but rather the art has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the arrow pricks the wound itself, while it was in place, do not apply this powder; instead, apply some ointments that have been prepared, or made from flour of wheat mixed with water and honey until they dissolve; then let the cure use other remedies until he is cured.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	If a fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, apply subtle pressure; and I will tell you about fractures of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck-wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, but there is no difference between this and a fracture of the head; but if the nerves of the neck or the arteries are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, do not apply anything to restrict; because they will cause night and draw them back; and do not put anything on the wound to warm it up, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and continuing this so is with the brain, which is in the higher members; but if you want medicine, like calix washed in sweet water, and melted with rose oil, and apply washed again in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so tie up and bind the bandages, then the treatment until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and a head is full of pus, then make a puncture lower down; and if an artery is cut, and blood comes out, tie off, lop, cauterize as best you can; and if the spine of the neck is pierced, or the throat, and keep it guarded, because otherwise the flesh will rot, so sew the wound onto the girdle of the neck, but not touch the neck itself, just put it back according to its natural figure, and then tie it off immediately, and let it remain for some days, then treat with ointments and poultices until it heals; and if a piece of bone has become stuck, try to draw it out; and if you cannot get all the pieces out, leave them alone so that the wound will not rot and be inflamed, and the issue can come out; and if the wound is fresh, then put some powder on the powder that I told you.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has an abscess, then the treatment will be as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the arrow or sword wound.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from an arrow or sword, and the wound is deep, then look at its size because the malaide will know if it's mortal: and if it's not deep and fresh as all the blood, don't put powder on it or tie it tight by the wound until you are certain of that; and when you return to examine it again, and come close to the heart, then ointify the malaide; but if you have ointment, tie it twice a day; and if you do not have ointment, put in the wound linen cloth to absorb the moisture, and make the malaide sleep on the wound for three days or four, or more; if there is no spasm, nor malaise of the heart, nor any other sign of death; and when you see the bones getting well-disposed, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the sore with various treatments until it heals; and if it will not heal or close, seek advice to see if there is an abscess; then do as we must.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is an incision from a sword or knife, and it is simple, on the front, back, or side, if the treatment of that which is in front of it; if it is large, do stitches; and if it is small, use powder; and if it has penetrated into the bone and broken pieces, as you will, then cut away the foulness if there are any; and if not, leave the wound to dry out, for this will ease the extraction of other wounds on other parts of the body, as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	disease caused by excessive wind
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I will translate the text line by line:
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	In the cold, warm him thus in one way: moisten with a sponge or one pound of linen cloth soaked in water only, or heat it in boiling water squant and cipre and spique, and apply to the intestine until it becomes loosened; and do this on occasion, and when the pain has subsided, let him breathe for himself, as if he were free.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or boil and mash so as to be loose; for by this the entrance is opened with little effort; and if it cannot enter, do a small incision on the instrument of which one strikes the varicose veins; and the first treatment is loosening what was tight, since none should cut it unless there is great need, and that's the stricture to be broken: take out from within into the nest and save well, and see this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	When the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, if you reset it according to its natural form in its own place, since you have power to do so, because this is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, if you wish that you put the patient lying on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, if you raise the head and the navel higher than the parts below, and so when there is a rupture in one of the two parts, pay attention to this that the navel part is higher than the other; and thus you will do what I say for both large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use the things that are set before you, and then take your hands in to administer pity who holds all the rupture with one hand, and assemble the lips; and this is the common way of suture, and it is that you prick an needle or more, according to the size of the wound's width, then leave from the top of the wound two fingers' breadth, and prick a needle with a strong thread; and pierce both the skin with both the needles which are inside the skin, from that side until you pierce it so much, and assemble the two lips together four times; then tie a double thread around one part of the needle; then assemble the two lips of the wound together as you did the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you have need of needles, until the whole wound is closed; and use medium-sized needles, between fine and coarse ones, because fine needles pierce through all the flesh, and coarse needles cannot go well into it: therefore they should be medium-sized. It does not suit to push the needles too far away from the flesh and the skin, lest they pierce and open the wound before sewing; and then prick the skin of the needle that they do not irritate the patient at night, and put ties or cloths around the skin of the needle so they do not slip and are held in place until the wound is sewn. This method of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it uses one more second suturing, which is common, and it is that you assemble both the skin and the intestine together to a single needle with a strong medium thread; and when you have pierced all the stitches together, then tie the needle back at the place where you started, in the way of sewing cloths.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I let the intestines go, then when it had been there for XXIV hours, and the wound was closed after fifteen days, and the treatment was done, and the patient became well.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they had a sign that he was dying, and this was a miracle; and I did not treat him with medicine, for I was in the place where there was no one to be found, nor any remedies; and I placed cotton on the wound twice a day above it, and washed it with water of honey until he became well.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing: take the needle and the thread from the inside to the outside as far as it can; when it pierces the skin straight in through, so that the wound is not stitched on top or below it, but rather on both sides, as a tailor stitches fur coats, and leaving one side loose, and pressing it tight on the other, until the suturing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, as the Gauls correctly describe it, is just like this: whoever does that, puts together the two parts in a natural way, and connects one chief to the other chief in this manner: prick an awl or needle close to one of the chiefs, and pierce only that one alone, and leave the two joints of the chief; then turn the awl and make it pierce from the opposite side just like inside those two joints; then pierce both of them from the opposite side, in two other joints on the other side; and this is the most gentle method of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	The Gauls say this phrase, and no one testifies to it, that we must sew the belly with two needles, if there is thread in each; and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from the other side, just like those who sew seams; and know that when the surgery is done on the belly, the stitches are more painful than on the other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are like the judgments of other wounds: and is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, just as it has moved, so replace the intestine, and take care; then put on powder in powdering char, and if it has moved so put on any ointment that is present, until the wound is closed; and sew the thread, and suture the sifac, and the mirror; then cure the wound like other wounds, until it is sane; and if you do not have medicines, then put on, as soon as they come to move bowels, cotton wool, and move two times a day until it is sane.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	But you have no need of other medicine besides in special cases when wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will cause common commotion to the main members, it is convenient for you to apply a light linen bandage in olive oil hot or rose oil, around the edges, and under the scars; and if he feels pain or pus in the bowels, and this often happens, so use clusters of black wine tedium, and the same thing when the purulence comes just at the intestine; and perforate it inside, and see that when it is the large intestines, it is more easy to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot be healed when it is rotten, and this is because of the seed of the vine that is in it, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and its proximity to the nature of flesh.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the tumor jumps from the wound, and you put it back in place as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it becomes old and turns to black, it is convenient that you cut off the one that is black, because there will not be more blood, for there are veins and arteries; then strike what is between the bowels, and hang the two fingers down from the part below the wound until the tumor projects and the pain subsides.
de la routure dou boueil	of the fire of boiling
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, so it can be restored in some men, because I have seen that one man was wounded in his belly by a spear; and the wound was on his right stomach, and became inflamed and turned into an ulcer, and in this way there came the vomiting and the flatulence; I gave him treatment according to what I know, and did not cease to subdue it until he was healed, and let him sleep.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him healing, I doubted that the patients did not have any ill in their belly; and there was no harm, but he improved in better conditions, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when a small wound is in the intestine, it should be bound in such a way: take large firm bandages, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the bandage has wrapped around the mouth, put two lips on top of it, so that they strangle his mouth; and then strike the head, and thus it stays so that he cannot untie it, then put another bandage after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, and there is no nuisance to the patient, and it can be tied to the intestine with a fine thread that has been cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the head of this fine thread from the intestine that is very clean, and then tie it to the head of this fine linen thread twisted, and then draw the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull back on the route; and this kind of sewing is not foolish but according to the path of expectation and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestines' grains, there is no relief or cure except by subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula whether it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Says that any wound or abscess, when it grows old, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it becomes a fistulous opening and retracts.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	Et fistule is according to the nodulation of the skin free from injury and blemish, or one does not feel pain, and it is like the hair of a bird; and sometimes in clear bowels, and at other times thick; and sometimes small, and at other times large; for I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed, and there is no ulcer, is caused by fire only for one of the VIIII causes: it means that it is due to the smallness of the wound or the body; or because of its malice; or because there is a hard substance inside, and above the lips, that does not allow it to heal; or there is too much bowels; or the liver is affected by poison, and the medicine is bad in the cure; or because of the corruption it is like pestilence; or because of the property in the region being late digestion, and late health, and fleeing by nature; or there are women or bones: and I have shown all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary to inform you of the cure for fistula which is made by work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Knowing that fistula occurs in all limbs of the body; because there are fistulas that come out at the great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the scrotum, or at the intestines, or at the bladder, or at some of the ribs, or at the spine of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet; and such as occur in the property of the principal member, and resemble these.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas of this kind are from bad health, and there is only labor and ignorance; if there is any fistula that does not come out at the place I have described, and you have faith in the cure, and you observe its appearance, take a bowstring or iron rod, if the fistula is straight, so also do; if it is twisted, search for a subtle device to bend it, because the bows bend in the twisting; and if the fistula has lost hands and cannot be found by attempts, search through one of the missing hands, because the moisture is close to one hand more than another, and pollutes; then give your full effort to know where it is, and ask the patient well how much pain they feel when you press with your finger, and what place it feels like; and when you know truly where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or any of the places I have told you, do it according to what I have told you, and cut out the rotten flesh and the corrupted parts that are inside; and then perform the cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply rooted in the straight way, so also do as much as you can; then put moistened medicine on the bowstring, and pour them into the fistula, until the superfluous matter corrodes which remains at the bottom; and then put clean ointments to heal the wounds; and if it does not heal by these means, if the bones are corrupted from the fistula, cut as we have said,
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	For the veins or nerves that are swollen or inflamed, as we have said; and if a bone is exposed, and there is corruption and black pus, then remove it until the corruption is all gone, and then treat the wound with the appropriate medicine until you are healthy again; and if they are not healthy, and their bowels are upset just like before, know that you will not be saved by this method: if you uncover and ask for it so that you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb; and if they are in such a state, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	But if it is not so, know that the corruption has reached too far, that you will have no chance; if there is only one way to cure it by nature, and if there is a small bone corrupted, then treat it with tongs, if there is an instrument suitable for the task, and if there are many bones, remove all of them; but do not leave any one of them behind; and if the moisture makes you worse, and there is no fear or doubt, cut and moisten the area, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you cannot remove them within an hour, put a poultice on the wound and cover it with a dressing to prevent corruption, and let it sit until the pus has built up between the bones; and when they have lighter bones, then they will have an easier time with the bones; if it is one large bone, such as the thigh or knee, you should just treat the corruption so that the black part is completely removed, and then restore the wound; if there is a lot of corrupted flesh and comes to swell around the bone; you must cover everything until the swelling subsides, and then cure him until he is sound.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man within thirty-three years who had pain in his leg from an internal cause that came to the leg, so much that the matter accumulated inside him and he burst out with a large abscess, and did not have any other cause to open it; but they were fooled by their own foolishness and opened up the abscesses even more, and consumed a lot of matter, and turned into a fistula, and there came a great amount of pus that all the doctors grieved for; and many tried to cure him within two years, and I found no remedy in the art of hands, until I was called, and came to see his leg and the medicines they were using on him, and what the purulent matter was causing; and he became red with blood, and had a yellowish skin color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set a tent in one of the wounds, and then searched all the wounds, and found that some came together across all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I fell short, therefore I cut in one of the wounds until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and putrid, and it was carrying corruption from the inside of the bone; I saw what appeared to be the bone being corroded, and thought there could be no other corruption, except for that which I had removed; and began to heal the wound with medicines as long as it would, but could not mend; and then I began again, and found the bone in its original place, and saw that the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then I thought of mending it; but I couldn’t do so until I cut through a palm-sized portion of the bone, and pulled it out to its full size, then restored it with medicines; and he was healed and mended quickly, and did not require further treatment except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had in him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often causes convulsions, but it was entirely safe and he was born with a hard cartilage in place of his bone and was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary effect at all in body, in bed or in coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, if it seems fitting to do this: take a cord, and strain the head of the bone which is open, and command that anyone stretch it up; and put another cord of linen thicker than the first one, and tie above the cartilage which is covering the bone, until you reach the head, so that you may pull the cartilage out from under the bone, and uncover the bone where you see it is open, lest the bone be corrupted by blood; and put a splint or a board underneath the bone to cover up the corrupted cartilage; and wait as long as you can before seeing and feeling the corruption, and allow the corruption to come again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Et se li os est corrumpus, and n’apert mie, and li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, and puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, and soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; and se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, and soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; and se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; and se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; and la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu puis, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; and saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; and por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; and saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	For the shoulders that are infected either from within or from without; and when you have tried to cure this corruption with medicine, and it does not profit, then it is advisable to cover that member up to the place where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes by death or malice, which is a greater evil than the failure of the limb; and the sign is that the limbs become blackened, as if they were burned with fire, and after blackening, the corruption spreads from one part to another, and takes hold of the whole body; if you hasten to cover it up, and this is due to the percussion of venomous beasts, such as scorpions from the sea and wrens, when the corruption is in the head of the spine, then strike at it, but do not give any space for it to come near your hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Et s'elle vient jusc'a la main, si la coupe a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne vienge jusc'a bras; 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; 
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s'aerde, 
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; 
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast is swollen and indigest after many days, he knows that the breast does not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if small veins are cut after long time, do not despair of your health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are homes who do not heal from the wound after many days, and those who do the opposite; and if the breast is swollen for a long time, it knows that the breast does not heal; and if the breast takes a long time to heal, and is far away, add dry medicines in powder and moist in virtue, just as the ointment dissolves, because there is much vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take ointment dissolving, and make it with rose oil and aromatics from old vinegar equal in substance; then confine and use; and this same thing makes a cooked honey when ointments dissolving are not present, or you take mirror, aloes, and incense, and grind them, and powder over the honey while it is on fire; and then wrap it around the breast, and sometimes administer an aromatologist long-lasting, and roots of celestial lily, which is also like wheat flour and cinnamon; and use from simple or composite things: break them, and make powder, and put over the honey as I said, and use; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then it knows that corruption has reached to its end, and made impression in the bone, or in the hard members, or in the ligaments; so take care of the cure of fistula, just as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the elephant
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	A boil occurs on the elephant's skin near its hoof or foot, or sometimes it appears in other places; and when it is small and no attention is taken to it, it will develop into a boil, swelling and ulcerating until it bursts as long as one runs along its root. Sometimes they burst entirely; and soon there are corrosions just at the bone, causing strong pain, and are the swellings of both feet wide, and have a red color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the section on treatment, and the treatment is not effective, it is necessary to copy it with iron until all remaining swelling of the boil has been removed; then cautery the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The fire cautery is a great aid when the bones are sound, and the joint is healthy; and if the joint presses the cartilage, and begins to puncture, and bleed, it is wise that you put the bone below the joint so as not to point the cartilage, and push it up high, and strike that cartilage subtly and gently, and apply the rest of the medicine on burning and corrosive matters to remove all; then treat the pain of ointments until he is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, if you strike it and pull out, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see the corruption spread, if you strike at the root as previously said, then treat him until he heals; and if he has iron and bleeding, and he feels great pain, it is wise to first heal him; then strike the joint with a small knife well made in cutting across above, and be careful that the cut does not come too close to the cartilage under the joint, because the patient will feel too much pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain comes from a sour throat of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The swollen fingers of some men come from accidental blows, and by chance they have bones, and sometimes an angle, and no time do the swellings appear at the root of the joint, or they occur in other places.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who swell in no place of the body do not move, and those who swell at the joint of the two bones by chance move; the size of him who is swollen is lighter, as if it were a root of a large spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who swell at the root of the joint are grievous to cure: if it is bound with linen.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the swelling of one in the groin or elsewhere outside, it is advisable to cut first around the roundness just on the bone, then cut the bone at an appropriate thread for that, and then treat him until he is cured.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The soundings that come when the two joints are assembled come from birth or by sudden injury of a wound or by burning with fire or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is believed that one must copy the wound, if so then they must repair according to their natural form; then place between two tents or soft cloths soaked in oil of roses so they do not unite; or put between two subtle pieces of flesh until they are united, as seems fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the soundings come to either of its two joints with the palm, then cut the wound as seems fitting.
des vils	of old men
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	These are large venous swellings filled with melancholic humors that come to more of the members of the body; and it is more common in those who go on foot and work and carry heavy loads than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you administer no cleansing of gall, and then the healing of the basilic.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron cautery is done in two ways: one is to cut and treat the black wound; and the other way is that you tie the vein and treat it with force.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting is done in this manner: first the doctor raises the leg to a hot water, very strong, so that the fat is not subtle; then he strains the leg of the sick from above the chest to below the knee; then he cuts the vein in one, two, or three places, with a wide cut, then cleanses and treats the black wound with his hand from head to toe, so much as the virtues of the patient can bear; and then ties it and commands that it be dressed with meat in order to prevent the gall; and repeats the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and hurts the sick man.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	If the vein is crushed and twisted and rolled together and it's not straight, as we have said, then it's necessary to cut it severely, but do not cover it; and pull it as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron bar that is cut open to let the vein if it is curved, and do not make a notch, lest you cut the vessel; and it should be thick because if it were thin, so would you cut the vein, but let it be as we have stated, and this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civilian's flesh
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is located in the thighs, in warm areas where there are no herbs or trees, and on dry land where there is no moisture; and by chance it may appear elsewhere than in the thighs, and this happens because of putrefaction that comes from below the skin, as it moves into the body through the skin and then between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein cutting indicate that there is a great inflammation in the leg, then the swelling comes and changes, and then the vein begins to force its way out, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the head of the cut opens, it is advisable to wrap it around a piece of cloth from one and a half fingers to two and a half fingers up to two fingers, and the bone, and let the cloth stay on the leg, and whenever there is no need for it, wrap it around the cloth, and the new membrane; and if it's too long, cut off a part, and wrap the remaining part, but do not cover it at its root, until it's completely empty; because if you cut it, it will return to the flesh, and cause an abscess and rotting or pus in the place, and a severe illness; so that thing must be treated slowly, up to the head, and leave nothing behind in the body; and is sometimes this vein when it is treated after two palms of length, or X, and one inch was brought to me, to whom it came out from X palms long, and whenever you cut it, you lose I pounds or parts, and pierce down to the root, so that everything is empty; and remove the material inside, and apply new medicines daily for rotting, until the cure.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes to this vein it rains blood, and itself when it opens at the joint of the foot, or the foot, and then a lot of pus comes out, and from which it flows; therefore cure it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between the skin and the flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "bovine illness" in our land because it has often affected cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and goes up and down the entire body, causing pain from one member to another, until it bursts through the skin or leaves, and runs out; and is filled with pus of some humors, like serpents, lice, and insects, as well as worms in the stomach; and people doubt its malice, because when it goes throughout the body, it climbs up to the head, and enters the eye, by chance, it returns, and destroys the eye; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you treat the cure and tend to it, if there is no fever that will appear, then it is necessary that you tie the limb above and below with a strong cord tightly, then strike up and treat it, and if the vein breaks out in front of the arm, and you do not find it, then cauterize with fire on top, until it dies; and the greater evils that it does are that it runs oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming towards the head near the oil, then bind below it the seal form, then strike up, and treat it; and it is necessary to use the patient of purgative medicine body, with soluble medicines for bad humors poured, and if he warms of rotten putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of pain that comes from windy conditions
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it causes pain that arises in some members, and it moves from member to member; and I have seen this, which I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to a sick woman, and she revealed to me that there was an inflamed vein on one of her arms; and after a while, I saw it move as a worm at the shoulder, faster than anything, like quick silver when the knife cuts through the flesh. The pain departed from that place, and settled in the shoulder, and then it ran across the whole body, until she came to the other arm; then she told me that it had turned again around the body, just as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed greatly at how it moved from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in that manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Toutevoie, I have seen many that have suffered from great pain of their own movement but I do not want to, as I saw in the woman; and I thought it was because of this that women had a hard body and uncovered breasts, and because of this they appear constrained; and those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and exposed veins, do not seem according to this reason.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when I see treating this disease, and the patient feels that great pain, if it opens like we said, then let them hold it so quickly, and then strike above so that the constrained breathing stops in the body; and cauterize the body; and if you do not see that with your eyes, then the cure for those who bind the veins, such as fetid pills, serpent pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	due to arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the type of body or where they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	There are different types of arrows, depending on their shapes and according to the parts of the body where they pierce. There are those with large points, small ones, and spiky ones, and those with sharp edges, and those with tongues, and those that cut into pieces; and some cut in two different ways: either in a principal member such as the brain, liver, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When an arrow therefore pierces a non-essential part of any of these members, and the signs of death appear to you as I will tell you later, then it is necessary that you remove the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in various dispositions; and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow does not pierce to its full length, take it out and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, and when the blood comes out and hits the bone, and the syphilitic fever which is above the brain, is when there are symptoms such as scotomia and seizures and delirium and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and convulsions and difficulty with understanding, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it may occur without any pain in the nose or ears; and by chance it may be near the throat and voice; and it appears as if there is a white pus coming out from the wound like ants, and jumping around like the sound of burning charcoal; and if this sign appears to you, then take heed of the cure, and pull out the arrow (if it’s not already) when it's not present.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it bleeds or pours blood, is that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and by chance the bleeding stops like ants, and comes with cold sweat and cold fever, and fainting: perceive this at once, for you are sure of death.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of the arrow is that it comes out without any bloody foam from the wound, and the throat becomes swollen, and the patient changes color, gasping deeply and sighing with a bitter pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	But if the arrow falls into the cover of the breast, so it is near the little ribs; and it comes out with a great pain and a great swelling, and the patient gasps deeply and all the limbs move except the shoulder.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	But if the arrow goes into the stomach, by chance it comes out from the wound with nothing of undigested flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	But if the arrow goes into the belly and does not go through the intestines with a piece of cloth, then there is no hope for recovery or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow flies into the bladder, and the urine falls out in a sudden manner and comes forth from there, and the patient feels great pain: see that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs are safe according to the various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you because of what has happened to me, so that you may do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to me at a house where an arrow had struck the skull or temple near the root of the nose: I tried it, and pulled from another side under the fatty tissue of the ear, and it was healed suddenly.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	Instruct the patient to tie an arrow in the fat of oil under the paper under, and the arrow is tied back, and you should not touch anything except the tip towards your fist, and it's a great Turkish bow arrow, with all iron going lightly near ears; the game was safe, and no bad accidents happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And tie an arrow to the neck of a Christian, and it was a Turkish bow arrow under the ears: I tied the beards, and made it so subtle that I tied it, and the Christian was safe.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And tie an arrow to a man who was pierced or stabbed in the chest, and I thought he was dying; but after thirty days passed, without any change in his condition; I cut up the arrow, and pushed it out, and nothing bad happened.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	If you see a man with an arrow shot into his shoulder or back, and the wound is closed over; and the arrow remains inside him, and he does not change his natural disposition, nor finds any discomfort in any of his works naturally.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another man with an arrow shot into his face, and the wound is closed over; and he suffers thus for a long time great pain; and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And there was an arrow shot into the man of the princes, the king's man, who had been wounded in the neck, and was beginning to decline on the right side; and the wound was completely healed three days after.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I sought with great subtlety for it, and did not find it; and he felt a point and pain beneath his left ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the point of an arrow I placed upon his left side, belly and digestive system, because the lungs were inflating; and they appeared as if there were arrows in the chest.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I placed the poultice on his hands every day, and solved the wound directly; and he remained thus for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed on the wound medicine with corrosive properties by hands daily, until it was broken open, and I tried it; and he felt the head of the arrow getting dry in his lungs; then I opened up the wound further with that medicine, so that the arrow appeared visibly; and after four months, the wound was closed again, and I tied it tightly from one side and the other; and he could not come out; therefore I did not stop to be subtle and ingenious with instruments, until I took them one day, perfectly made, according to what the form of this chapter would bring at its end, until I tried it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it then, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I will tell you the quality of extracting arrows, so that you take your cure on what I do not say, for the books cannot understand everything; but the wise masters comprehend very little, and only on what they are present and failing, find new ways, and new instruments, to deal with the strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed except in two manners: either through the joint or through another part; and when it happens that an arrow enters through a joint, now it does so for the first time.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	Instruct the patient to let it lie still until the flesh is putrid and decomposed, and let out its issue; and similarly if it is fixed in the bone and cannot come out, let it remain so for some days, and move it every day; and then it will come out, and if it does not come out, pierce into it through and through until the bone is enlarged and then take it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If an arrow is fixed in the bone of the skull and is stuck just above one of the ventricles of the brain, and all the accidents that I have mentioned to the patient: if you do not treat it, but let it lie still for some time, because if the arrow comes out through this spot, it will be death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	If the arrow is fixed in only one bone and does not come out through that spot, but the patient remains still for some time without having another accident, then it will take effect to be cut.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she is much cut off in this way and cannot come out properly, I administer more tartar inside, as I have told you; then treat the animal till it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is put back in the animal's body, so that it cannot be seen, and it has taken up residence completely; and if you feel for it, if it sticks to something useful; and if you cannot see it because of the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bone or nerve visible; then carefully feel as long as the wound is large, and if you can feel it, take out the arrow as much as possible, and if it has ears in the arrow shaft, where they are stuck, break off or fold the ears of the arrow shaft, so that you can pull it out; and be careful not to break the arrow, so that you can pull it out more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you cannot do it once, if the pain is within the limbs until they are torn apart, then take them away, because the extraction hurts greatly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if you take a vein out in vain, then follow what we have said about the cure of this chapter; and beware of the incision on the nerve and the vein, and put into practice how you should treat the arrow wound, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow pierced him, because that is the greatest aid there can be, and if you cannot do it, then put him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	If the arrow comes from the other side, or if there is something opened in it, or if the skin is swollen to the point where you see or feel it, then take a larger size, until the tongs can grasp it, and then extract it; if now it happens.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, so turn your hand round completely, until it enters the bone, and expands the bone, then take it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, so leave it alone for now, and then start extracting again until it does emerge; and if the arrow is stuck in it, pour a full dose of the medicine; and if it has fallen to the ground, and you see administering a poultice, do administer an instrument of horsehair, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then pour out, and if the arrow is embedded, pour the instrument with pointed end inside, for to alleviate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is to your advantage that you copy the entire arrowhead or where the poison is, so that you can, if possible, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Instruct the patient to cover the wound when it is discharged or bleeding outward, onto the skin or in the belly or bladder or at the chest. And if it is close to the vein and you can do so without causing more harm, then cover the vein and the nerve, and then extract the wound; and if necessary, cut the bandage, as this will be; and cure until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used to remove arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and look like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in many sizes: great, middle, and small, according to the amount of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the hook that grasps hair is like the feathers of a bird, to grasp at the tip of the arrow, as it looks like this:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the pincers for pushing and for catching is here:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins on the body common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Of veins that bring health are XXXI, because there is one head XVI, which is namely: two branches behind the ears, called the "soft herb", and two arteries in each temple appearing; and two veins in two ear canals, called "spurs"; and a vein at the forehead; and a vein on the brow of the head; and two veins that are around the neck; and two veins above the lips, which are called "jugulars"; and two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	There are five veins commonly in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, and is located on the left side of the chest, and they call it "vein of the head"; and the second is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins; and they call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side of the chest, and they call it "vein of the belly", and is located above the spleen; and it is that vein which heals, which opens up clearly in the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The saved vessel is the vein between the auricular and anular bones, and there are two veins. And in the leg and foot there are three veins: one below the curve of the pocket on the left side of the left costal margin, and the second which is located at the ankle bone on the right side; and the vein called "nese", that is located in the other ankle bone; and in the other leg there are three veins below those ones.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The vein after the ears that is used to treat old catharsis and migraines, if applied correctly as I said, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the skin where the veins are rough; then tie the patient's neck with a string so that both veins appear behind the ears in two places below: if these do not work, then go to another spot, and when you feel the pulse beneath your navel, make an incision; take the lancet, and pass it through under the vein until just before the bone; then lift your hand up the entire vein, cut and the skin and the vein well two must be traversed, and bring out the blood until you see; then tie and bind, so that she is cured; and I have said incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The sick of the two arteries that are in the two temples, so value to emigrainne ancient and slow, and obtalmie accustomed, and at the eyes of the watered, and the qualities of the healer are as I say: And it is that the patient straining his neck, until the two veins appear openly; and feels the palsy under the toe, and then takes out the lancet; then lifts up the vein in the high place to the foot index, and buts it down, and lifts up the vein, and cuts, as you have done in two other veins, and do bleed according to your need; then release the patient, and put on the foot above the vein for an hour, then put on cotton; and then forms and leaves him until he is cured.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The sickness of the vein in the front is worth as much as the sickness of the head, and of the ancient diseases, emigraine, and roujor; and those who have such qualities are so that they strain their neck by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point above the vein, and thrust upwards of your hand, or with another thing, and let the wound open as far as you see; then deliver to the patient the neck, and tie the vein so that it is healed and never again will bleed with a flame wide.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	It is not advisable to let the wounds be too open; and the healing from across, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the wound when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The patient with two veins in the arms that are near the elbows should hold the hands and fingers, and the wrist, and the redness, and the swelling, and the orifice of the vein, and the diseases of the face; and those who have their illness like this, will strain their neck by twisting from any bond, as before; then the treatment, and let the treatment pass through, a little deep into the bone, a little long, a little wide, for there is no harm.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the swelling is subtle, by chance it may break; then make a quill of blood, as much as you need, and then tie up the wound, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The swelling of the vein in the neck is valued at ague, and at a strong fever, and at diseases of the face, which cause emigration and redness that comes on the face, and painfully when it is old; and those who have this illness are bound with a knot, then strangle their neck by your left hand, and take a long, thin quill, and strike it into the flesh between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well in that place, and now the bleeding will begin to flow; and do not go too far, and make the treatment of blood according to your need, then tie it up for one night, because she is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the quill.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The sainie of the two glands aids in the tightening of the vein, and at the beginning of incision, and with a great number of diseases, and gangrene, and corrosion, and herpes, and it is said that the quality of the sainie is such that the patient strains his neck away from one side and the other, as we have said; and if the masters are standing above the chief of the sick person, and the sick person sees in one siege, then cut open the vein long enough to make a small incision, and apply temperately until as much is done as is necessary; then redo another opening in the other vein, then release the ligature, and tie tightly around the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave him thus till morning, when the wound will be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the wound of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	For the wound of the mouth of the liver above is aided by applying coal in the mouth, and corrosion of gums, and splits in lips, and does not heal.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the wound is to have the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck so as I said; then turn the liver, and look at both veins, where one is on the right lower lip and the other on the left, and they can be recognized by their color, for they have black veins that are smaller: hit either one or both, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, hit the largest of each part, just as with the others above and below, because it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the injury of the throat below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The injury of the women which are below the tongue should be treated after the head injury, and it is due to constricting the throat, and because of diseases of the eye, and of the mouth; and those who know how to treat such injuries are those who place their hands between your fingers in front of the sun, and they lift the tongue, and look into each direction one vein black: then heal both of them and do not go too deep for under them are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the shoulder which are commonly treated are treated in two ways: either by pricking at a large mitten-shaped mark, or an olive tree-shaped one, as you count them, and they are called 'anesil'; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The fiery form of mercury is very famous and is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And has the need to open the vein cheek plains of large blood visible, which contain large blood and trouble; and it is the form of fiery olive.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And is more subtle pointed, and is for healing small veins, or it has subtle citron blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, greatly helps in diseases that are beneath the throat, and near the neck, and near the liver, and the stomach; and it suits the physician that he heals with basilic, and that he warms himself from the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery and blood flows out, then it is fitting to stitch, as I have said; and let not be painful the fiery form, but make it like honey.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic does not open immediately, it is advisable to remove it and change another one; or if you want any rain from it, or if you heal in its place on the arm: it opens immediately; and strike at the flame again, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the vein of the wound, it is also advisable to remove the arm, that you touch the vein until you know the pulse; then mark the point of the incision, and then bind the arm, and strike again at the vein with a flame; and be careful not to cut into the artery when you see the vein swollen, for that's from the artery: skip it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it bulging up just like the urine of a child, and there is no redness or subtlety, know that it's not from an artery: hurry then, and put on your do (likely referring to a tourniquet), for many times have; tie off your arm, and let it be in that way, and don't move the patient's limb; and beware of fear, and don't move them until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stopped and he vomits, and you have no medicine for him, then cut the artery when it opens, because the head of the bone recoils; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of sinew and cut it, and take one half and tie it tightly onto the other half; if the blood does not stop flowing, that is good; if not, then as we have said, apply the powder that stops bleeding; for applying the ointment on the limb in such cases is not suitable for those with a small wound, because of the swelling.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The sainie of the vein is often assisted in applying treatment to the head above, and to the body below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic, as we have said; and it is fitting for the master that he should cut into the nerve that is below, and if he cuts too deeply, and the nerve becomes inflamed, and the patient suffers greatly, and by chance cannot be cured; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person because of its subtlety, it is fitting to clean out the sainie with the instrument before using it; and pull out the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if they have veins between the two fingers, then make a cut on long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The head of the patient is helped by drawing blood from the head, and assisting the eyes; and it is advisable to bleed at the flame of olive or at the flame of myrtle, because this is the safest of all veins, for it has no nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	In any case, it is advisable to seek out the lighter vein for treatment, and not worry about anything if you need to do it the first time, and then start again; but by chance the veins may become swollen at some people on the first attempt, but they won't be harmed.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	Instruct the patient to know that healing is not done for healing alone, but rather to preserve health and avoid future illnesses; and let the healing be done in one of the three veins: cephalic, radial, or basilic; and if it is done at the beginning of prayers after fasting, in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear; and do not perform the healing on the first day or third day, but rather two days or three days afterward.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The healing that is done for illnesses has no fixed time determined, but rather when necessary, in any hour or at any time; and it is not advisable to heal children under 14 years old, nor pregnant women only during the first four months of pregnancy.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They must not remain sick those who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when some wish to be cured, in what manner whatever it may be, it is wise that he makes the intestines of a light castor oil bag, if there is much bile retained, so that veins do not press upon intestines and cause superfluous protrusions to the principal members; for he will not recover those who are too salty with meat, or those who are ill with fever, whether it be from an excess of blood, or dropsy; and if he purges himself after colic, vomiting, and venter's decline, and multiplies his habits with wife, labor, watching, and marriage, and does all that can be done by the arm or body; then subtly he treats the humors, not too heavy by food and drink and medicine, as much as is possible; then he enters a bath, if none of these things fail, to treat the wound, and recover from the vein at the third time, just as we have said; and beware that day of work, and pain, and luxury, and similar things; be bound and rejoiced, and may you heal higher than those who are sickly, and rub the arms twice or thrice, then loosen the tie above moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, he cannot correct himself without; then rub the hands as they become swollen and painful; then apply a poultice of salt from an old rags doused in oil, then put on his bandage with his left hand under that vein until he wishes to be cured, lest veins fail him.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow like cords in the body, and some that are filled with windiness, so that when one places the flame on them, they retract to flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is done to those; and if they cut the vein, it is because the wound is too tight, therefore it is advisable for the doctors to be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; but if not, then again attempt to open it near that place or very urgently, so the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are inflamed and the patient hopes for it to pass, let them wait a day or two, and do not tie up the arm: by chance an abscess may come on; or they should not enter the bath, then reattempt the treatment as it pleases; and if the wound is small, or if they are cautious and you doubt that it will not be so bad as you see, fear not in the same place with all its heat directly; cut a little hastily, so that the veins may be inflamed; for this happens often when the injury is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the swollen limb, do not resume the surgery again, and put a little bit of lard oil on it, for it alleviates the body from pain, and is moistened by the lard; and thus administer the lard oil to each wound that you heal, to quench the course of the pain; and similarly make a tracheotomy and a bowel when putting the lard on the limb; so subtlety does not harm and it saves when it is too big.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if it happens that there is a large abscess, which occurs often, at the same time when there is no surgery done except to open the vein, then hurry and put a moist sponge on the limb with a little vinegar and salt; tie it up for an hour; and it is fitting that you do this after the issue of the wound from the vein, and if it stays on the limb after some days without any blackness or greenish color, it will not harm; and if you see, put some aloes or mirror juice mixed with vinegar or calamine juice on it.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times occurs an abscess and appearance at the swelling of the basilica: put then your hand on it, and if you find the lump soft under pressure with your hand, that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not put anything on it that we have said, for by chance cutting without an artery; but make the wound dry first to harden the lump, then apply another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each person according to the quantity of their virtue, and by the color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is black, let it be allowed to come out until it becomes red; and if you see it gross, let it be allowed to become subtle; and if it is too thick, let it be cooled.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for one who is weak and feeble, and needs the extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, and let the festerings be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it will bring him healing quickly and often, and he should be healed by cutting across, not piercing; and this manner of healing is safe from the corruption of blood and the coping of nerves, and is better than healing with a long needle or a broad one.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose blood needs to be drawn during the healing, it is fitting to give him milky pain in grape juice; if he is heated, cut into the blood three or four times; and if he has a cold temperament, put in front of the wound milky pain sweetened with mead, or with aromatic syrup made with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, a very fragrant one.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If the hand has a wound, after a lot of blood has been drawn, it is fitting that he drink broth of char, and sweet smelling syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to swell one arm and heal again, it is fitting that when he is weakened by great wounds, he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to swell one arm after the first wound and has strong blood, will be healed in 7 hours after the first wound, or after the next hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to be healed of another part, if it is necessary that he should be healed the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, and fait venir fievre;
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, so let it be left and not tightened, until the abscess is healed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to treat the wound again, whether in the same vein or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein is moved to the arm because of its composition.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of the vein if is such that the patient puts his hand in hot water, until the pulse is red; then it is bound slightly, so that the vein appears well; then the wound is now treated through it, not too wide or too narrow; and if there are large scars, they are sutured well near the joint of the hand, and if without any issue, then put the hand back in hot water, and let the wound heal in the water, until you have enough; and if this is so, do not put the hand again in hot water, because it is more useful in winter than in this state; and the healing of this vein is more safe than all other veins, with no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The sick of the savelet of the right hand is worth all the diseases of the belly, and this is the way: strain the hand, and pour in hot water, until the wound is empty, if it can be seen; and if it's twisted and you cut it through entirely, so that nothing grieves; and do not go too deep by the finger, for the nerves are very dry at first of all, and then put the hand back in hot water, if it has not frozen in the wound, and will not come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as necessary, put oil and sinew on the vein to close it immediately, and do so for every cut.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The wound in the left hand is worth to the disease of the mouse, and do it as I told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The ailment of the spleen is worth more than all other diseases that are within the body, such as disease of the marrow, and retention of flesh, and illness of the joints, and of the knees and legs old, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And if the quality of his spleen is such that the sick person puts in some stone into a hot bath, and rubs over the vein until it dies, and ties above the joint of the foot; and the vein is on the ankle, and from above the foot goes out much pain; heal the donkey then whether it is more painful to break the bone, or on the ankle, that is worth.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it above the foot, be wary of the warts that are below, and heal across as well as when cutting, so that the flesh may close.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot come out (of the wound) without it, then put his foot in the water, and let well-ventilate the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the suture is needed for the first time, then reapply it on top by a little less, because the glue is salty; do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and so apply equal sutures to the other foot.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The glue of the sciatic vein is located at the heel bone, and its stitches value for the pain in the hamstring, when it's caused by bleeding.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And if the stitches of its suture are such that the patient is between bathing, and extracting above the heel, four fingers in twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then suture it in all possible ways that you can, and across; and value your time, for the glue is lost, and it is much returned to hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	If you do not find it, then the person will have rain or blood on their head and feet, and towards the little toe, and beware of the bowels; and make as much care with the wound as you can see, and then release the tendon, and put on cotton and binding; now they are healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of wounded by suction
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or thorns, or nails; and suction is done in two manners: either by hurting and attracting the wound, or by hurting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction when it is done by hurting and extraction of the wound is done in thirteen places on the body; for some are all in the head, others around the neck, and two around each shoulder; and one under the chin; and one under each elbow; and one above the ribs; and there are ventouses in both arms; and in both legs; and in both knees; and it is not applied to the wound, except for small veins scattered throughout the flesh, as when making a venous dressing; and it should not be done with heat or cold, in any disease that comes from overeating, until all the body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and myself when it is at its worst, we command the physician to let us swallow after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The disease of the liver is helped by the application to the heat of the head… that comes to the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventosation is in place of the disease of the cephalic, and it should not be used by those who have a hot temperament, or who have catarrh, because this hurts them much; and therefore it should not be used by those with head cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become blind, and therefore they should put the ventoscope a little further down by the doubt of blindness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventosation of the neck is in place of the opening of the chest and the basilic vein, and for this reason she values herself tight at the breast, and a cutting of the channel of the stomach, and with a thrust, and a filling; and it is necessary to poke little, because if she holds too tightly, so there ensues an obliqueness or a vomiting out of the stomach or the heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventosations are in both costels of the neck if it causes pains of the head, oculars and emigraines, and strangling, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and are in place of the basilic vein; and it is necessary that you command the lord that he express his hand to put, that he does not cut the artery, and does not wait until there is a discharge.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The windings below the chin is a sickness of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is near the sinuses of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings on the shoulders are worth a sickness that comes from heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windings on the buttocks are worth as much as three veins in the arm, because it attracts blood from these large veins; instruct the lord that he should not strike too deeply with his instrument, for the skin is thin and sensitive to cold and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The winding that is above the buttocks is worth emoroids from the fundament, and diseases of it, and it is necessary that the wound be large and made of linen, to treat well, otherwise if it were subtle, it would break, and cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The medical ventouses of the legs heal openly because they attract blood from the whole body, and are worth as old pains from the rain, and from the maris, and from the bladder, and they bring forth flowers; and they are in place of two sophenes, and two knees, and they all weaken the body after a long time, and bring forth pustules on more frequent occasions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way of putting the ventouse is that you put it in first empty, and succeed perfectly, and then place it hastily, and move evenly, and do not cease to do this, until you see the skin red and swollen, and draw out the redness from the blood; then, again, remove the ventouses, and take care of the disposition of the body, because there are those who have contracted such a char, and clear pores: it is necessary to cut once only, and it is fitting to make large wounds, and deep ones as well; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is not large, he must strike it twice: once to make a small cut through the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very thick, he must strike it three times: and when we try to cut through the small blood vessels little by little, only one time suffices.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we repeat the process often: and if it is thick, he must pierce through it deeply; and when we finish cutting, so that the veins are perceived suddenly, cut at one who has hard skin and is rough to the touch, with whom you apply the oil of apertif dissolving on the swellings of the fingers: if this is the case, use vinegar oil, or oil of almonds soft, or oil of cucumber seeds; and if it is wine, then use oil of cresson, linden, camomile, or any similar kind.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is great and cold, take olive oil, amberwort oil, or balsamite oil, and anoint it.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But if to those who are being made healthy the wounds have small and fine pores, do not put oil on them, but instead wash with water of rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or pearlescent water, or another similar kind.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, lift them up with hot air, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have great swelling lift them up with old wine, or water of rue, or annetroot decoction, or other similar things; and should not be healed by suction before the bath, nor after the bath for one hour or two hours; but do not sleep afterwards, for it is necessary to ventouse when it must be ventosed, and when it is swollen.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	Instruct those who are healthy to be cautious of being choleric, and if they are not too hot and inflamed, then it is advisable for them to take cold things, such as pomaceous fruits like grapes and endives and lettuce, and similar things; and eat small portions, and wear a belt of leather, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion should take honey syrup and fragrant wine that is between youth and adulthood, eating little, eating small portions of chicken, pheasants, and pigeons; and on the day he will be convalescent, he must drink more than eat; and it is advisable to give some men some vinegar or mustard at one time before convalescence, or after, to comfort the principal members; but be subtle in this without, for it is not wise for those who are hot to drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles qui sont mises sur le foie et sur la mice, et podagre, et sur le ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nous metons ventouses sur le ventre et sur la boude pour amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sur le foie et sur la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides pour sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensemble feu, et aucunes fois plaines d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude sole, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cauterizing with fire given is this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And has two fingers of width and half palm from the root, and has a groove to one side of the middle finger a small puncture, like to insert a needle, and be made of iron or wood, soft in front so that it does not prick the patient while placing on the member; and have at the middle a crossbar of iron or wood, to hold a bandage, and they are large and small as per the diseases and age of those who take them; for the cauterizing of children is different from that of adults, and thin ones than fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And thus place this cauterizing instrument on the member: take a linen or wax strip and put it in the middle of the cauterizing instrument, through the crossbar that is in the cauterizing instrument, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cauterizing instrument and does not burn the patient; and then place it on the member, and make sure the two fingers which we have said are above the puncture, so that when you take it out, if vapor comes out, do put back the cauterizing instrument; and take up the linen as before, and reapply often, if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the winded one who is ministered to with the disease of pleurisy, has no pain and does not have a fever or an inflammation, and is taken care of only when it is full of pain, and is placed on the limb alone; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Veins are taken care of only in limbs where it cannot be put a catheter due to smallness, like lips and gums, and similar things; and in their nostrils of char, like two or four, and other such; and the qualities of use if is that when you find veins that are in clear, cool water without injury, take them; and put one nettle in clear water, until they become familiar with it, and have nothing in their stomachs; and then let be cleaned of vein and catheter, and then rub the member so that it is red, and put on the veins; and when they are full, and swell, if it can be put a catheter, put one, because this is very good after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If the wounds of this chapter have often caused evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the wounds do not wish to be taken, then rub the limb with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until the wound opens, and then place them on it, and immediately when they feel the blood, they will stop; and whenever you see that they start bleeding again, sprinkle powder on a little salt burned, or powdered silk, or ashes, so they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	You must know, dear son, that the methods of cautery are found in this chapter, which one never saw in the ancient books, nor learned from letters; and because of this, the science has been lost in our land, for I have not found anything good; and I know nothing, except through the knowledge of the ancient books, by studying which I have treated the science, and through experience, and by the custom of my life; and I have written out here what is contained in these chapters, abridged at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments to be used, just as I did in those two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in this prologue of this book the number of words and chapters which the wise men place their understanding upon, and dwell on the truth, so that those who have been experienced learn and acquire this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When any break or dislocation or twisting or constriction occurs in the body, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the sick person from one part and from the other, if no hindrance comes to you, such as weakness of body, or sickness, or old age; or if the limbs are too weak, or too cold; and when a chill is present, which is what I mean by frosty joints, and charmed with poultry and wildfowl meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty foods, nor stuff yourself too much with viands that fill the veins of blood, until you have no doubt about an abscess or swelling in the member; then return the patients to their previous government when they used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to restore themselves, it is fitting that one nourishes the patient with foods that produce great swelling, or where there is viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and risottos, and tests, and pease, and pancake, and oysters, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For nourishment that produces swelling, it is more pronounced and occurs sooner in the breaking of the bone.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that old and decrepit bones cannot be well re-covered or soldered according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, neither can those which are too tender, like the bones of small children; but there is no cure: to the large bones that have been healed and joined together with the limb so that it becomes strong as it was before; and not all of its strength comes from work, and for this reason they should be nourished with great foods, just as we said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And finds that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fractures of the head are different from those of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that happen around the joint, and others that occur from cutting, just like the length of a single hair for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if with a fracture there is an open wound, and if a fracture has a small split or fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each kind has its own instrument and proper tool for restoration, according to what is remembered in its place; and it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs because of the joint being twisted, and opening well by itself, or by pressure on the finger; and if there is no tortuosity or swelling near the joint, and the patient feels little pain, unless there is a fracture; but they can still have tortuosity, fissure, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not fitting to move your hand now, but put up medicines that are coming after this, and then hold it now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And knows that the fracture which is in the arm, and are two parts joined, it should now be put into equal points, so that the abscess comes to an end; and if the abscess forms, let him leave one day, until the abscess is calmed; then place it into a joint as lightly as you can feel it, and knows that the restoration of this part is lighter than the restorations of those who have pieces.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, so that it is in two parts, then it should be done as follows: if it is in hand or foot, do it according to its natural form; if it is in both hands, or one foot and one hand, put the member accordingly; and when the parts of the limb that are broken are diminished, make replacements according to the size that you can, and take care that through your work there will not come a new lesion or pain to the patient; and do well the two joints of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if the dressing is done beautifully, and not too tightly strained, nor pressed as those do who try to bring about with their work an intense contraction and tightening of the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is set at a point, instruct the patient to keep it still and not move, neither in waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor by any other means; and be sure that the limb is so firmly fixed that he feels no pain whatsoever.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not at a point, and you must set him in the same position so that he feels no pain; and be sure to keep him straight, lest twisted movements come upon him when restored; and let the quality of the broken limb be as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Things that break a limb are different in small, big, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For small members, such as arms and hands: it is fitting to wrap up a bandage of soft, smooth linen; and for big members, like thigh and leg: one should wrap with a wide, hard rope, because the wide ropes encircle the entire limb, and tighten all parts equally, so that there is no gap; then tie lightly around the handles, three turns or four according to the limb, and bind with your hand tightly to the whole rope, then go above the break and tighten less, until the break goes away slightly; and soften the rope a little by little, as much as you can feel a healthy part of it, then take up another rope, and turn back over the break; then return to the lower part of the break, and tighten moderately, not too tight nor too loose, as we have said in the first line above; then put linen or cloths between the ropes, until they are all equal, then tie everything from top to bottom with a bandage, and then place your pins well made on it, if there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	If it has an abscess or an aposteme, put a soothing paste on the abscess, and if you remove the swelling, let it stay for some days; then strain on your joints, using a moister of one-inch width, or a splint made from wood, or palm fronds, in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but it is necessary that the splint put on the break be a little larger and wider than the others; and should be as long as it needs for either small or great limbs; then strain on the joints just like you did at first, then tie over with a thread, in the same way as before, so tight as possible, but not too much, lest it hurts; and the thread must be of a good quality, neither too thin nor too thick, made from flax that is not twisted or distorted, for if the thread is too thick, like I have seen with certain foolish people who make their casts with corded linen rope, it's a great error, because the cast can never be even if it's too fine, and it's better to leave some space between each joint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	If the patient is sick from the chiseled stars after the binding in their healthy, then they put some linen cloths or a woolen bandage on them so that they will not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When a wound is with a fracture and the knees are broken, I will tell you the cure as follows.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And since it is not necessary to strain the stars on all broken members on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the members are great, it is not necessary to put stars on them every day, unless after 5 or 7 days, or more, according to your safety and the treatment of the abscess that will be made; and thus I tell you how the ancient embalmers used to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: and it is that you take flour which stays on the walls of the mill, mix it with a great deal of egg, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of restoring fractures in many conditions, and especially for women and small children, because it's neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plastering restores the break and dislocation and twisting: take onyx and lapis lazuli and amber and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, ana X; mirror and aloes, ana V; alechil VIIII. And make a powder, and mix with honey and vinegar; if the complexion of the bone is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores the broken bones quickly, and saves many lives.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plastering that is good for twisting: take myrrh and visnaga, ana X; mirror and aloes, ana VIIII; vinegar and ACaice VI. Boil well, and confine with water or honey, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to treat the joint and its bone, you must bring and clean them together, and soothe the following pain; and use the broken bone, and mend it: take a new linen, and clean it with fat and oil cooked, and put on its place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plaster dressings do not restore, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and proper cleaning of pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to treat plaster that restores broken bones: take dry leaves of fig and earthy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to treat plaster for the restoration of broken bone and for relieving the following from the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Instruct the patient to take roots of valerian, camomile, violet flowers, wheat flour from each, and pound them; and mix with wine, and put it on the limbs when heated, or mix with moist coriander water or vinegar, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of applying plaster is stronger than the first, when an abscess has developed on the restoration of a limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of valerian and seeds of flax, balsam, melilot, and sansucca, and flowers of violets and camomile, in equal parts; pound, and mix with salt water or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Iporcas writes in his book that you should not put on the broken limb for restoration with just cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between too wet or too dry.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one must place the broken limb above, to restore, moistening dry things with a little hot, as we have said and shown, and other similar things.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat wounds and pain: take the flesh of a dog, or bones of an ox, or quails' beaks, and equal them out, and crush, and make it into a poultice and apply to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then the limb is left for a little time afterward, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has moved his bones; if he does not leave it by hand, or if the pain comes to the bone, or prurites, with rest or swells, if you hasten, remove it, and remove the poultice now; and take a light bandage, and a sponge of moist sea water, and plunge into the water, and lift up the limb until the prurite ceases, and the pain is appeased; then let him rest for an hour, then put on a dry linen cloth, moistened in water or olive oil, and tie it above a nut, until you are sure of an abscess forming.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that an abscessed foot and red flesh pain and swelling are full of bone all around, and you have to plug and tie them, if it comes back again, as you did first time.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If it does not come to the limb any of what we have said, then do not release it for more than 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7; and never let it go longer than 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and approaches the joint near the bone; therefore restrain it more tightly than before, and feed its flesh well, as I have said before; and if you see the limb drying out more than necessary, know that serious consequences cannot come of it; then give the limb hot water treatment every time you release it, and do this one pound, and a little later; by this work therefore cut off seriously what is coming to the limb, and hasten what the foolish healer does, which will leave the limb twisted: this is bad, and it is an urgent concern, and I see nothing else but that of binding and overstretching it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various kinds of breakage
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many kinds of breakages and diverse forms, and the causes are determined; for there are breaks that are caused by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone is crushed all along with the bone just beneath it, as if hit or struck; and therefore this kind of breakage is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword hits the bone on top of it and pierces through, and this kind of breakage is called "absolute"; and there are two kinds of wounds resulting from these two types of breaks: large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has pierced embedding, or tearing, or fracture of the collarbone, or striking on the bone with a stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is an ongoing fracture, which approaches just in front of the membrane that is under the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is covered with a thin layer like our hair, and the fracture is small, and because of that it is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound is made by striking with stone, or falling, or some other thing, and the bone piece falls into the joint space, and the joints are so swollen as when the cauterist heats up his tools over the pots; then the bone enters within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens to those who have moist bones in their head, like an infant's skull; and it has all sorts of fractures with small pieces broken off as if by stones; and I will speak about them.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by pulling them apart, and examining them, and by the corrupting flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is known because when we discover the bone, and we rub it above, if the fracture opens up.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, take care for accidental evils in the patient, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, stretching, paleness, fever ague, and eyes that fall out and turn red, and other similar signs, then he cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an extraordinary accident and you expect a cure, as you begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the winter comes to you, and it is time, if possible remove the bone in front of the eighteenth day at night that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this is the case, so be it that you hasten to remove the bone in front of the seventh day, otherwise the tissue under the bone will become corrupted, and accidents that we have mentioned will come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the break of the bone comes just to the covering of the brain, so be it that you cut off the broken part thus: and hold the patient's head firmly, and uncover the bone in all the ways you can, and on the face of the wound as well as you can, and when bleeding occurs from uncovering the bone, or abscesses, use what is necessary, and fill the wound with moist rags soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses are quieted, and be certain that bleeding has stopped; then begin to remove the bone, and this is done according to two methods of work: one way is that you make a narrow cut at the breakage beforehand, and it is like this:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then they cut into another part of the body more deeply than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various cuts, some are three deep and others wider, with points and ones made of iron; and work lightly so as not to hit the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and thick, it is wise that you pierce it through, so as to administer cuts with chisels, not by boring but so that the point does not go beyond the bone of the cheek, and must have on one side a margin or a circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you should have more than one, so that each comes in its own place from the edge of the bone, so that you have chisels for all your tests; and this is the form of the three kinds of chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing through the bone that is broken are such that you put more time on the bone, and turn to your two sides until you know that the bone is pierced; then set the tarry there again after a little while, and do thus all around, and later, cope the spaces of the incisions in the space between the parts, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take out the bone with your hand, or any of the instruments that you have, such as pliers, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the soft flesh.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone and cut it, if some part remains that has stayed in the bone at all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it is necessary to be more tenuous and subtle than the others; and if there are no remnants of small bones or scales, then gently remove them with one of the instruments; and then cure the wound with tenets and oignments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of working is what the Greeks say, which is more so; and it is spoken with great force, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where or at which the break opens up, so that when you have uncovered that part, you put down the head of this incision lenticular, because it is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut with one stroke, and it is the part that is troubled in two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then, after striking with a small mallet above, so that you lightly copy the bone all around, and be well guarded from the cloth that is under; if it is rough against the bone, strike lightly at the bone, because one strikes the bone with little pain, but with much fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the head of the shoulder is broken so that it just fits inside the cloth and the bone is hit only from above and there are small pieces, then it should cover back over that roughness and remove the scales with a subtle raspener which you have many of, in order to meet each person's most convenient measure according to their work and figure.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have more coarse raspers and after that more subtle ones, and do not cease to use them until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other delicate procedures and subtle fractures, it is fitting that you meet each according to its direction; and this is something that no one has responded to, for he who has studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the abscess is uncovered, it is fitting that you apply gauze according to its quantity, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another gauze doubled twice or thrice, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it over the first one; and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not burden the abscess, but rather let it heal gradually; and leave it uncovered for one day or two, until the swellings are subsided, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lion's root, mustard powder, incense powder, and aromatics, and similar things; and make a paste, and put it on the wound, and administer the aforesaid medicines with mastication; and beware that the wound is fully healed, so that you do not leave any dressing or assemble any bowels, for when bows are assembled over the cloth of the brain, they will be infected and burst, and bring great harm to the patient, because when something sharp is put on top of the abscess, it causes inflammation under it.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care now then no accidents happen to the patient, as we have said, since it is doubtful in every case.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no burn occurs except for the medicine we have placed on it, because of its virtue, then you should take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and in glue make a dressing, and put it on the wound; then treat with remedies as needed until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that no two times are the bones of the neck broken in two, or one by itself alone, because they are two bones; and this lower one is cartilaginous, and breaks not, unless it is bent or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two bones is broken, then you should put your little dough or paste on the broken part, and place it inside the broken bone with your thumb index, and in the pouch near as much as possible, until the bone regains its natural shape; do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the neck, and it cannot come back to its place, you must put an equal thing on the head of a straight stick a small one.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, do it again and hasten to restore the first day if you can; but if not, after the seventh or twentieth day, when the swellings are smoothed out, then bind on a cloth of linen around the neck if the break is in one place.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or if you put the other part on, if it is; and the bindings are so thick that they fill in the holes of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And said any healer that we must moisten the bindings in butter and move each one day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem good to me, but it is likely that they are moist in the preparation of a mixture of wheat and oil, and powdered milled flour; then let the tent be stretched out until the bones harden, and the cartilages become hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes no cloth or linen of goose is used in place of the tent, and if it has a suffocating covering inside, and holds the injury, and blows on the patient between them; then first see what you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscesses come to a boil while you are working on it, then apply a poultice or cotton soaked in oil rose, or in half a pint of vinegar.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses do not come, then apply a plaster according to need, of flour of sesame and powdered incense, mixed with wheat oil; then place on lightweight stitches; and do not tie the linen; and if the break is small, and it breaks into very little pieces, then extract with suitable instruments as much as possible, then sew the opening, and the treatment for those with open wounds, and applying ointments, so as to be fit for them; and if it has no wound inside the linen, then cure with tent cloth, and apply plaster to a depth, until he is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the cutting of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is cut under, and there is no wound to cover it, and only a fracture without any breakage in two, unless there are splinters inside, if one finds it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right side, that you put your two fingers into the mouth of the patient; and if it's on the left jaw, put your two fingers on the right hand, and put the fracture gently inside, and close it with what is available.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced outward from the middle, it is necessary that you extend two parts until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth have come, or a fracture, then the straining with a thread of gold or silver or silk, put the broken mandible on the cheek, and put under the double flap; and put under the flap an excellent needle well made, or a piece of leather even, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it above what you can do, and instruct the patient to rest, and serve light viands.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure has changed, so you set it free for the third day, and then put back in its place what is changing; and apply to it, from a powder made of ground mullet or flour of sasset, after you have removed the ointment; and apply over the ointment a linen cloth, if the ointment is applied, and the disposition of the patient does not change, let it remain until he is healed; often people are healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes to the foot, then follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both break and wound together, replace no part of the bone that has been extracted; for such subtlety of the extract is most suitable to those.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it as necessary according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have extracted all those pieces and there is not one remaining, apply the ointment to the wound if it is large, and put on some suitable plaster according to what we said so that it may promote healing until it becomes sound.
de la forcele	of the swelling
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The swelling often breaks several times over the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways: either it is broken and deviated twice, with fragments, and is then lighter to restore; or there are fractures with wounds.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Instruct the patient so that when the break is near the wound, you have two ministers, one who holds the arm to feel the fractured bone's force and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put even the break on your hands so that its form is as it should be, without any appearance or lump.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	If you need to stretch further, put a round spear of cloth or linen over the patient's shoulder, so that it is as big as your need requires; then straighten the bone and restrain the spear with your hand, so that you put even the break in its place.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you cannot treat the head of the fracture outside because it comes in from within, and is suitable that the patient lies supine on his back, put a medium pillow under the shoulder, and have the ministers pour oil down the shoulder, until the bones of the fractured part are lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then direct the fracture to your two bones, and if you truly find the pieces broken, it is advisable to break them further; and take out the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined together for any amount of time, cut into one of the joints that you have; but put in this instrument with care, to avoid swelling.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it resembles a spoon, and is not hair, and is as large as you need, according to the size of the bone and the shape of the work; and has two handles, just like you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, just as is the nature of the wound that you made when you cut the bones; and when you are sure about the swelling, sew the wound, and if the swelling is small, or you doubt it's too much, then fill the wound with cloths and bandages according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess forms at the joint it comes to, then apply moistened linen in rose oil and ash and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The straining of the bone, when it is sensitive to pain and swelling, is that you put up the bone with the plaster of powder from the mill and black pepper, and place light strips on top, and if necessary, insert a spear below; then take a very large bandage of a palm’s width, and apply double strips above the plaster; then take a subtle needle of three fingers’ width and one length, and wrap it around that bandage so that the head of the bandage is hanging; and place the needle on the fracture, and turn the bandage up over the shoulder, and from under the shoulder to the sick part, and straighten each piece, and when you see that the ligament holds the break immediately, and you clearly see that the needle does not move above the broken bone, if you reapply every day, and when the ligaments are loose, if so; then make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder, to lift the apparatus up high; this will relieve the fracture by the stretching of the shoulder, or when you tie his arm to his neck, and do not untie it in case of bad accident, for twenty days; then reapply the plaster, if you see that it needs it, and tighten and leave it thus, until he is restored; and he is restored within twenty-eight days, and in less than many men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	From the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the shoulder breaks or is broken in two, do not apply force to it unless by touch; if the limb appears according to the figure of the break, and is molded according to its natural shape, in all ways that you can; then put powdered flour from the mill with much wool, and light stitches, and put under the limb a double drapery; then place a large and subtle needle, one piece larger than the shoulder, and take out the thread at any point of the shoulder, so that the thread of linen is stretched equally; and then tighten it firmly to all a great band, so that the joint does not move from its place, and observe each thread daily; and every time you apply force, loosen the thread, and put on the limb as soon as possible, and lie the patient on his cost side, for the shoulder is restored in XX days or in XXV, And when this number is completed, he will be cured, for it is not a matter of bone that must be set lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone bursts outward, and the point below the curvature, so they make above, and the bone, and do as we have said in breaking the abscess of the hot pus.
de la brisure dou pis	of the broken foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The piece is not broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often when exposed.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, so that it declines downward, and the patient feels great pain, and loss of appetite, and nausea, and sometimes vomiting blood, and by chance opens the wound into the broken bone, and the pain becomes more intense.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is thus: when the patient lies on his back, and you place a cloth between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the two ribs to your hands, and do so subtly in all ways that you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then apply plaster and bandages above the subtle part of salt, or some other light substance, and wrap them around the broken bone tightly, so that it does not move; and turn the bandage round to the back, and bind immediately, and reward him every hour for a little while, unless he becomes loose; and if you want to release him, because of corrosion or itching that comes to him, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and release him, and scrape off the plaster, and address what has come upon him in the treatment; then remove the plaster, and bind him until he is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	It is clear that the breaking of the ribs comes only to those who have a large belly after their back, and to the head inside, and they collapse only because they are hollow; and it is felt well at the inquiry in the bowels.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatments are that you put the break in equal measure, as it seems fit.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply an emplaster, and tie with a stake if you have need.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is bending towards the inside, it causes the patient great pain and puncturing, like pleurisy, because the bone pokes through the membrane; it's also painful to cough, and burns, and vomit with much bleeding, and it's a source of bad health, and the old ones have used many remedies.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it should be administered foods that swell the belly to push the fracture away from the surface.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, unless there is pus in the wound.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then let it heal.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And none of them say that you should put poultices on the limb, to suck out the pus, and it seems like a good idea; but there is doubt whether poultices attract the superfluities to the limb because of its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And none of them say that you should cover the limb with linen moistened in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to set it straight again, then cure it with the treatment of bleeding, flesh, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure by the bone which pinches the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is fitting to break up the broken side of the rib, and it is fitting to place under it some instrument to ward off the splinter; and thus one must pierce the bone, and treat lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and cure with plaster, until he is sane.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess comes in, then place moist cloth soaked in rose oil on it, and put on the vein; and treat while the vein is swollen as much as it should be, over the costal side where it must be, until he is sane.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	There is no breakage of any bone of the neck, and it does not occur when he bends; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this occurs without breakage, and you see if it will be healing or not, if you warn yourself that if you see your hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move nor stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in more positions, and if they are mute and feel well when you tighten them and prick, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured if you put a treatment on them.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if such a thing occurs at the spine of the back, and you see whether it will be healing or not, take care that if the feet are softened, and if there is an accident in the hands, and when they jump towards the belly, they jump with violence and excretion against their will; and when one has seen this on his belly, they jump with excretion against their will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he sits on his back and he wants to sit down again, so cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Those who think it is fatal if they do not work on his cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if such an accident does not happen, then it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward him if he has a hot abscess, so apply oil of rose or oil from milk or beeswax, until it is appeased; then put on a comfortable and dry plaster, and bind with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone is exposed, it is fitting to cover the wound; and take out the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if they are great, with a seam, then the cure with bandaging and sewing, until he is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "chiés de la kowe", pour some of your left hand's pouch into your right hand, and put it equal on the other side to your power, then put the plaster and needle above, if you have need; then tie, and if there is an exposed bone, make up, take out the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the shin bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the shin bone is fractured, and if so, even a little swelling at the head; let it be set long, and sloped to the bends, and it comes to the patient pain in the limb, and point, and swells as it breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, until you are over the fracture; and see which way it is fractured and what shape it is; and if the fracture is only at the head alone, then set equal that fracture, until it has the natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it declines inside, then have the patient lie on his stomach, until the restoration of that fracture becomes apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have made it even, then put on the plaster, and put on an iron or leather stake, and bind the break, so that it does not move; and apply to the joint below the breast, until it is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to lie on his sound side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes on the foot, do not touch it until it is laid down, and put on what we have previously said; and then return to the restoration, and bind as it needs to be bound, unless there is any other foul accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder joint.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The joint of the shoulder is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of two manners: for one manner is that you take a flat piece of cloth or leather, according to this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind with the two fingers and the two joints, and put them up high, and sit the patient on one side; then place the sick person under one side of the arm, so that the broken bone comes to an anvil, and a wedge of wood is placed in between, then take up any heavy thing upon which the servants extend the limb; then put the mires in the briseure equal to his hands together, until the briseure returns as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is that you should put the patient under his hateryle, and bind the hand to his neck; then command two servants that one of them tightens what is above the briseure with his hands, and the other of them tightens below with all his joints, and stretch each one to his part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more strong, then bind below the joint of the briseure and above the briseure, and stretch each one of the servants to his part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the shoulder joint, so that you place a straight band below the collarbone, and the other over the cost, below the fracture; and thus, if the fracture is on the cost, it is advisable to put a lighter band, as labor, until the fracture is even with both joints, and with the cost; then set the fracture, so as it seems fitting, and tie it up, so that abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, do not restrain them until after seven days; put a moist cloth in the wound and olive oil rose, until the abscesses are calmed down; then tie it up, and the manner of tying it is that you place plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; put a bandage, and restrain on the shoulder and arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless any thing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone does not move, then use esterels, and place a larger and stronger needle on the break one more large and strong than the others, and put two spaces between each needle, and each needle so big that it passes through the break three times from each side; then pull up the needles, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter about the break.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	If you see the positioning of the needles and the straining, as we have said, when you restore the injured member, and you doubt the abscess that is left, if it remains closed for five days, as we have said; then look at each three days of the closing ligature, whether it itches or swells, or any inflammation comes to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If they do as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, after three or more days, let the patient lie on his back and hold his hands over his stomach; and place under the aid pillow one hundred pounds of even linen, and observe each hour of the day or night, whether the broken figure of the limb does not move or become softened; for the medicine to work, and give the patient the meat that we have previously placed before him, in such a manner that the meat be tender first; and when he comes to eat again, if it is thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset after forty days from the beginning; and therefore, one must dislocate and administer baths and medicines for the limb to become well.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is crooked and blocked, so it stays stuck for three or four days.
de la brisure du bras	of a broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the "fossicle", because one is small and is where the pouch is located; and the other is large, and that one is under the smaller bone; by chance, only the larger fossicle breaks or both, the small, and sometimes they break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small fossicles are broken, the treatment is light and healing; but when the large ones are broken, it leads to worse healing, and more severe damage than when both break together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small fossicle is broken, it is recommended to stretch a little and put them even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	In case the great frost is, then they must pull more strongly; and stretch above the cussin, and lift the pouch of his hand higher than others, and the fingers should be lower than others, and so that the patient crosses himself on it, and cuss above him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then extend the minister's arm to the part below to his hand, or to the tendon, and one other minister to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put him in the mirror, according to his best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the break has pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is no suitable form that can be held, and you cannot restore it to its place, then pull out the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	If he has with the break a wound, I have spoken to the singular doctor about it; so take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration some swellings remain, apply a plaster made of linen dipped in rose oil and white beeswax, not too hard nor too soft; tie it on the swollen part gently, until they are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then apply the rose oil, and put on a plaster made of powder from the mill with much water, until it is placed, and the splints are set, so that the splint of the break is straighter and a little wider than the others; and observe that there should be six or more splints in these dispositions: whether the break is in one of the bones, or two; and tighten above the break more than elsewhere, and always less when you move it, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; and so be the draperies on the break soft and moist, not hard nor harsh; and let the fillets, from which it is strained, be made of linen, neither too big nor too small, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And repair the limb and the joint after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some foul accident happens to the limb, just like a prick that comes on the limb, it is fitting that you raise the limb in hot water, until the pricking subsides; and let the limb not be too tightly bound.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then reapply the binding, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones deviated, and it seems so, apply further pressure.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling does not subside in the limb because it is too tight, it is fitting that you loosen it a little, and let it be for some days, until the swelling subsides, and then bind it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things come to the patient, which we have stated, for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and if you do this treatment for him, then tie his hands to his neck, and so that his necks are even, and warn him of movement and of numbness, and let him sleep on his back; and observe that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in forty-five days, and by chance in twenty days, according to the nature and constitution of the humors.
de la brisure de la main	of a broken hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	observes that at the back of the hand there are few fractures, and instead only sprains many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and when the finger of the hand is broken or sprained, it is advisable that the patient tie a cross around him, and sit up straight in front of him equally; then put his hand over an extended elbow, and stretch out the broken bones, and make them even with the mallets, until they are well jointed; and apply plaster and bandages, unless there is an abscess coming on, then it applies a stake according to the quantity of the bone; and wrap him up in one half-cape of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	In case of a break near the tendons inside the leg by the ankle bone, make a splint from cloth, and instruct the patient to tie it to his broken leg; then tie it with a long thread, so that the size is as great as the plantar bone of the foot, and the tying, as it suits.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the break is in the forefoot, it suits that you put a splint above and another below the leg, so that the fingers are straightened and aligned; then tie everything around the hand, and anchor the rope between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the break comes to any of us on either foot, and it's swollen, tie it straight, as you like; and anchor it with the leg; and if you see that you should put a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not move; and if the break is in another toe, tie the ligament near the other healthy toe which is next; or tie them all together, so long as possible, or place a splint on top, as the swelled one; and beware of injury and proper placement of the abscess cut, and heal those who come to you, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	The bone of the fist breaks.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the fist is broken many times and one can see it when they turn their hand forward and backward; and the treatment is to tie both above and below the break.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And patients put their face on the ground, then each one stretches out these ministers equally; and this is when the break is covered with the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the fist, there are either one of the ligaments over the elbow and the others below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it's close to the joint, and then either there are ligaments over the elbow or below the break; then put the mirels (likely a type of splint) the bone equal to its two hands, so that it is according to its natural figure, and then apply plaster, and ligature, so that the abscesses do not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If it has an abscess, so let it be treated first, then return to its work and cure; the release is made in that manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the sprain in a bandage of two or three times, and keep the swelling there, then turn the leg until the toes reach the root of the nail, and put one long thread between the thigh and the knee, tie loose under, and fasten the chief with the thread above; then turn up the leg and above the knee the bandage, then set the splint on the bone of the knee; then apply eight threads in a gentle fold to tighten the ligature, then start tying again forming three or four turns above the sprain; and the more you go up towards the sprain, the less the ligature is tightened; then wait as two threads of the thread that you have put between the thigh and the knee, and tie three strips above, then return below to the chief with the thread, until you see from under the foot; and tighten it if it does not move from its place, then let it be so, then if no abscess or inflammation or other signs appear.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If there is, if he dislocates, and addresses what comes to him, as we have said many times; and if it has pieces of bone that hold, then they should be kept, since one can; and if one cannot, then they should break the limb, and draw out the nails; and the cure should be done as we have said, until he is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the chest broken in such a way that we have inserted needles, whether in the shoulder or in the arm; whatever method of treatment has been done will not fail to relieve the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is said that the chest is restored within three days, or slightly less or more, according to the diversity of the constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groin road
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	She who is pregnant will have a small break, but it happens many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	But if it breaks, it's only a small crack or cut, and she will have much pain, and feel very ill.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put equal weights on both sides so they are assembled and joined, until they can be moved again; then apply the plaster, and put a round nail in it if you need to, and bind them as needed, then follow all the arrangements we have said for other breaks, in a similar manner, and put each person back in their condition, just as is necessary, until they are cured.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg break
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Those who have the two bones in the leg, where one is called by the name "mustelz" and the other "foscile", all have another fracture when it comes to the arm; and because of this, the restoration is done as with the arm equally, and the wound is all healed. And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, there will be great pain and it can be seen well; then turn it below.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And then apply an extension, and put it in its place, and tie the ties equally; but be careful, if the break is ugly and there are more pieces, you should make the extension smaller and lighter; and make it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et when you have completed your work, so take two faxes of flesh that pertain to the thigh from one side and the other, and let them be long enough from the knee down to the skin; then tie them tight above and below, and in the middle also, and at this tying the leg will not be able to bend either to the right or to the left, and thus it is well; and none of these should be bound too tightly, for if they are too tight, the flesh will burst, and they should put on the thigh to keep movement, and properly done, this is done in the break where there was a wound; and move each limb every day to see if there is an abscess or another accident.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the break of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there comes no break, but with the bones of the foot sometimes a break occurs and as does this fracture, and it often happens in multiple dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If it has the bone of the foot fracture, and you see these bones rising above one another, if he places himself on the ground, like if he were walking, and then places his foot on his side, where the bones are lifted up, then presses them so that they return to their own place; then applies plaster and cloth upon, and puts over his belly of the foot a small table with two nails fixed, then tightens the bandage around it, and other things as needed.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four will have passed, if you release the bandage, because you will find the bones even, whether they are fractured, or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	In case of some broken bones, if you restore them, as we have said about the fingers on the hand; then put a splint on each broken bone according to its length, and make it a bit wider, then place under the foot the stable table that I have told you, and the tension will happen; and if there are II or III or more bones broken, if you put one splint above each bone according to its quantity, wrapped in one of drapes of linen, and tighten the table under the foot; and while standing on the head of the table away from the belly of the foot, so that it takes well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is fitting that you do not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, since we have spoken of them; and cure each accident according to what is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the break of the bone at the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman is broken, if it swells, then incline it to the back side of the neck, and hold it behind; then fill the basin with wool of the patient's size, and put in as much as I mentioned before; then straighten the woman's back, a little bit at a time, and so she will feel the cotton, until it comes into the opening of nature, and the bone returns to its place; and when she urinates, if the cotton is still inside, and when she has finished urinating, pull it out, and do this for 7 days before: then the break will be healed, and if you see it, take a container of wool and tie a rope around the wound, and pour the entire container into the nature; then blow through the rope so that the vessel is filled inside: nature will return to the bone; then fill with cotton again, and leave it for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the bone of the finger or thumb is broken in a man, or in a woman, so that it is restored as we have said with the bone of the heath; and these near-breaking injuries are not concealed from those who put their study and use there, and they listen to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For when the break signifies a stronger disposition on the right road of restoration: therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the phallus, when it is broken, take an owl's gut and put it in the phallus; then wrap strips around, and let him go for three days or until he becomes clean again, and he will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is to be considered by him who has a break with a wound, especially if it is great, so that the bone of the shoulder or of the elbow, or like such, may be healed now, if the remedies we have said testify for him.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is sound, if you keep the vinegar stain, and you have nothing else, then start again to restore the break in the same hour, or on that day, because no more venom comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the venom comes again, then leave the restoration until a new day, until the poison is appeased, and don't touch it on the third day or on the fourth, for you will bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks is visible near the joint uncovered, it is to your advantage that you place it at a lighter point with your fingers slightly extended.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if you do not have the tool to place it evenly with your fingers, if the device is one of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and the width varies according to the quantity of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary to the master to apply three or four pounds, according as he needs for each cure of breakage; and let them be tight, and a little plump, so that they do not fold up at all under compression on the limb to your right, and are placed in front, and large from the middle towards the front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And call it "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved nails be placed on top of the skull of the bone; and apply once, until it returns, and so are even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the splint cannot well grasp the bone, so that you copy the head of the bone, until the splints have hold.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, then with an instrument suitable for it, such as a cutting or incising one, to your power; then take away what remains in the bone of sharpness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain after, see that he is not in his natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, 
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	If the wound is severe or great and you doubt that no worse accidents come to pass as we said, and you find pain in the limb if it should not be bound up with stitches; but instead, use a soft cloth, wrapped tight, and tie.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if you see after one day or two in the morning bowels on top of the wound, so that you have put above all vinegar, and apply salve healing wounds, as ointment has been made to seem.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is fitting that you remove the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it becomes softened and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is fitting that the limbs be prepared in a certain manner so that the bowels move downwards lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they transgress every day, and it cannot be mended but rent again with a bow, see how there are small pieces of bone, therefore you should seek to mend the wound with care, and remove all these small pieces that come from that injury causing pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if an abscess or some other form of corruption comes to the body, it is fitting that you cure it according to what he has said in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and opens up in the limb, like the shoulder or elbow, and other great bones, do not treat it yourself, because many times death comes from this, but leave it to happen as long as possible; perhaps he will die after 20 days or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can, otherwise let him.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	That which comes from rubbing against a sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They come often after the health of the wound, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad thing to see the figure of the limb; and by chance, it cannot be restored to its natural state.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore take warning: if it is fresh, then the administrator should give medicines such as aloes, incense, and mirror, and saffron, aconite, and similar others; in such manner that you do not hold any of these things or all together, but confine them with wine or with abundance of oil or with ashes; and place it on the wound in poultices, and bind well, and do not loosen it in your hands for days; and then remove it, and repeat another, until the nodules are removed; or you tie a piece of bone well made; for the properties of the bone are such that they remove all swellings from the limbs; and if the nodulation is turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, so that the copes over, and the redundancy becomes apparent; or you take away any razor, until it is removed, and the cure until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A limb that is weak after a siege.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and stays in place after weak limbs and subtle movements, so happens for many causes: because one is due to having been tied too tightly, and was not tied loose enough as it needed; or because there are too many ties, and cannot come to the member; or because of repeated inflammation; or because of excessive movements, either too much in its hour or at all times; or because it has little blood in its body, so is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and soften the body, until the wound is multiplied in him; and administer bathing, and give joy and licorice; then put poultices on the member, so that the poultice attracts great inflammation, and the swelling rises often from the infected water, until the inflammation subsides in the member; and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	One arm twisted after the joint.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bones break open, and the form of the limb is ugly, all natural powers are lost: do not believe false people who say that one must break the limb anew; many foolish men have done this in our land, and these works are blamed, and they bring great harm, and by chance death; however, if the nodulations and tortures are fresh, it is advisable to let them arise from hot water or to cook herbs that are good for soothing, like violets, roots, and mallow, and similar things; apply a poultice of mallow, as daquilon well does, and take musciliaz from violets, and mix with lard or olive oil, and apply it; or take figs fat, and grind them with flour of colon, and similar medicines that ease the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the neck is stuck due to continuous rubbing and prolonged rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And so you should move the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted part is old and hardened, like stone, and requires being cut with iron, so that it covers just to the bone, do it at the subtle incision lightly; and put on a cushion and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When a dislocation comes about, if you want to now restore it properly.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For when it is late, if the joints swell, and by chance they are reset to their place; for this reason we do not move them until they have returned to their normal state: many times it has brought on phlegm and other pains; whenever it happens, one must cure the patient, then let them go, as long as the swelling is gone; then apply a warm member of water and oil, then gently reset the limb, and treat each member as the treatment will come in its own place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters for the treatment of dislocation of the head joint, to be done in small pieces.
des mandibules	of the jaw bones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It has happened that the jawbones are dislocated outward, and there are two kinds of dislocations: either they are a little bit osteotic (bone hard) and soft a little; or they are entirely displaced, and hang down towards the chin, so that the patient cannot hold their saliva in their mouth, nor close their lips, nor speak without spitting out saliva with their tongue.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by more frequent movements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and completed, it is necessary to reset it quickly, and not hesitate; and in such a manner that the minister takes care of the head of the patient, and gives him a certain amount of warm water from one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other two parts are avoided, to make them equal; and instruct the patient to let his mandibles soften, and move them from all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he puts the warm water equal, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if they return heavy, especially if it is the two mandibles together, put them on hot water and oil, until they move lightly; do not hesitate to reset them, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are returned equal, and the mouth of the patient is closed well with moistened cloths made of oil rosary and wax, then place them lightly wrapped in moist cloth; and let him sleep on his back, and his joints being between two pillows, so that he does not move either to the right or left, nor straining himself too much, but taking easily food, until the pains are gone and the mandibles are closed; and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not work too hard at opening the mouth to drink and to swallow, until his mandible is well closed and sound.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be set straight in one hour and are not converted to their original place, fever and sweating come, and with chance, an attack of wind, and by chance, vomiting blood.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign; and many have died in seven days.
de la forcelle	of the fist
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fist cannot be drawn out from the chest cavity along the rib and in the flesh, and it is not brought out at all, unless one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the sick man must lie on his back, and stretch out his arms; then press the lever towards the palm of your hand, and it will come back; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and bind it; and the head that is turned to the shoulder cannot be drawn out; unless not, and if it brings forth some pus, if it comes out at all, one must first reset it as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and bind it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus itself are brought back the chiés of the spine, when they are fixed in their place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	De la dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Injuries occur in three ways: either they dislocate at the shoulder joint below, or at the neck area of the bone, and sometimes above, which is rare; and this does not happen to the back of the shoulder or inside for the tendons; but dislocation occurs more often downwards towards the joint itself, especially for those who have little strength, because it happens suddenly; for those with enough strength, it dislocates at a point, and returns to that point.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men that they strike or break something, and swell the shoulder with an abscess, and think that this is a dislocation.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you try it, until you are certain; and then begin treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that the dislocations occur when they are lowered towards the joint, and you will find the difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find differences manifest in them; and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and below the joint, there is also a hollow at the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an ulcer; and the patient cannot bring their hand to its natural position, nor can they move from any movements; and similarly, if she has been dislocated in the upper part, so that it is not hidden, you will find it manifestly at the joint; and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to correct, when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	Instruct the patient to lift his hand up high, then put your fingers below the wrist, and lift the joint with force in the same place above; and the minister lifts the hand and extends it in the same place as before, since he has placed it underneath.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said the day before, in order that the patient may be bathed in hot water; and he is anointed with a mixture of mollifying and soothing substances, such as a decoction of altes and fenugrec and mellilote in water, and is anointed; then he is placed on his back, and a cloth of equal thickness, not too soft nor too hard, is put underneath the wrist, and a stick is placed under it on his back, with one mire's weight; and the chief of the shoulder is lifted carefully, and the hand of the patient is treated; and another minister takes the head of the patient, if he does not move afterwards. In this way the shoulder will return to its proper place, and if you look at it, if it returns according to this method: and it is that you make him be present one man who is larger than the patient, and stands straight towards his cost (side), and thrusts his elbow down onto the side of the patient's arm, and lifts the arm above, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister treats the hand of the patient below towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he will try to lift with him anything heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And this is done in another way: and it's on striking a long wooden beam into the ground, so that the joint moves as in an arrow, not too big nor too small; then it is placed beneath the patient, but only if he has fallen softly above him, and the joints are still standing straight with the long stick; then his hand is stretched out from another side forming, and the joint returns to its place quickly; and if it doesn't want to return for all these things we have said, do this cure: take a wooden beam of two arms' length and four hands wide, which has the head on one end so that it can enter deeply below the axle, in the shape of
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Instruct the patient to lie on his chest covered with a cloth, so that he is not struck by blows, then place him in the same position as the patient; and stretch out both arms above the chest of the long one, and tie the assistant's hand to the chest, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on the shoulder of an upright stick of a wide size, and let the hands be stretched down, and let his body hang from another part: the joints will now be in their place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is done in any manner whatsoever, it is fitting that you place below the incision a spear of wool equal, then put on the apothecary's poultice made of powder from the mill, with incense and onion oil, upon all the shoulder and back, then strain downwards from the incision immediately, and turn the ligature upon the poultice, and embrace the hand to its neck, so that the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is fitting that he should eat little, until the members are comforted, for he will heal faster; and then he should eat more after five days or seven, and move him; and if he is firm and not softened, he is cured.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is swollen from moisture or for another reason, so it is fitting to administer cauterizations three times, as he is placed in front of the cauterization chair.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after seven days he fails to stay in his place, and cannot lift any arm above, then you will know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is stretched or crushed or softened; and you will know that the joint has never been properly fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that occurs at the elbow and knee, or behind, is done by impulse and extension of hands, and serves another joint; and care until it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes griping in the limb, and slow movement, then use the patient multiple times, until that griping is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocated shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Says that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and returns to them; and if it has been dislocated in all parts, and even before and behind, for dislocations are not always returned, because one can see it well and feel it well; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick person to the healthy one, if it is clearly seen.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is swollen, and cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is therefore necessary to reset him so that the abscess comes out, for if the abscess were to come out, then would be a great grief in resetting; and by chance it may not be able to be reset all of it, especially when it is inside the bone; this one is worse than the others, and is accompanied by greater pain, and by chance it will come to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is thus, when it can be reset as such that you stretch out his hand to both of your hands; and his arms are spread out, and his fingers are bent according to the arm's joint, on and below, and draw the joint into its socket, or to the root of his palm, so that he revives in his place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	If there is a dislocation in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to its own, and fearing the nail of the palm that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	If it does not return to its original place, administer strong extension; and let two ministers extend the arm, and bind with two strips of cloth, so that it will not move when extended; then turn the arm on each side, after having bound a double cloth long and wide; and when the joint moves into its place in the hand, apply ointment of oil to soften the joint, then set the joint in order, until it returns; and when it is returned to its original place, bind securely with linen cloth, and leave some joints open on the patient's neck, and let them rest for a while, then release the arm.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, you should release the ligament and let it be; and if you see that the joint is not tightly bound, then reapply the plaster and the ligament, and let it be as it was for some days, until it is firmly set; then release.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the setting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe him well and rub him, and press until he is relieved; or you put on the joint a fat mutton's wool, then leave it for one day and one night, then take out the bone, and let the wound enter the bath; and when it sweats, if you rub the joint at the right time, then put back the wool, and then enter the bath again; and do so two or three times until he is cured; and if you see that, you place a hot moist cloth of fennel with butter on him, and strain over it; for he will return to his disposition.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joints of the hand are displaced, and the return is lighter than the other joints. Therefore, it must be brought back to its original place immediately, in the same joint where it was displaced, so that the limb does not swell or come with an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the remedy is that you place the diseased hand on a table, and extend the ministers of the hand, and set the mirror in an even position, so that it sets its palm upon the appearance of the joint, and applies the poultice until it returns to normal. Therefore, you must look carefully whether it is well at rest; then place the patient's back of his hand on a table with extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then put the patient's back against his back on a table, and place your hands above that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	But if it returns now, that is, if the pain caused by emplastrures (bandages) is appeased and calmed down, then let him so as to resume.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it and you cannot set the joint after some days, then the joint will remain distorted; and there is nothing that can benefit the patient except for as long as his hands are swollen, and he cannot strain anything at all: therefore know that the nerves are crushed, or the arteries; if there is no other cause except to strain with cautery of the area, and by chance it may be worth another thing.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are at rest, so put on the plaster that we have said, then strain it and let it be for four days, then remove it and leave as is.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be moved and there is no injury, so apply the poultice of hot water and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the two fingers of the hand are dislocated to one side, sometimes on the back of the palm or the belly; then they stick, and you push the dislocation into your pouches until it comes out, then support the head of the injured finger, and point towards the place where it is disjointed; and leave it for two days, and then put it equal to that day; and tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and take off the bandage from one day, and make it move again, and bind it in the same way; and do this repeatedly until it is tight, and doing so, if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, do as you did before, until it is healed; and doing so, when it is disjointed at another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Two dislocations of the shoulder bone
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder bone or collarbone is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, and no treatment is applied, death will hasten the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign is that one or more limbs are weak, cannot be held steady, and many times become paralyzed, both arms or both legs, or any other limb; and often the dislocated bone moves to four parts; when it settles on the back, it is called "gibbose" (or gilbositz), if it came from childhood: if no treatment or healing is applied.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And the one that comes from a fall or impact, or similar things, they used to tell old-fashioned remedies with great words, which didn't bring much benefit; but I have condensed it according to my intention and have made instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I dis that in the goutiness that comes to the foot in front, no healing occurs; and similarly when it comes directly into two sides, and cannot be cured with fire except for those who come directly to the back, as I said; and is that the patient should be stretched out on his face in one place and have a strain below him, so he does not bleed; then put one stick at the head in the earth form, and another at the joint, and tie a rope behind the knees of the patient, and another around the hams, and joints, and heels; and two ministers see the ropes, one to the head and the other to the joint, among the two sticks; and they must be well closed, the stick as we have said, and the ties put their palms on the spine form, until it heals.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if she does not return by this cure, take a table of three arms long, and shave it off above the skin, and put the patient on his side, and pour the chief of the table under the skin, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and put your feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do so to the turnip which turns around to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And cut two thorns on the head of one arm of the patient, and against both feet two other ones, with each thorn above and below an inch in length; and between each thorn a half-inch long, or until the thorn is broken or the turnip moves, so that it does not move; and between each two thorns there are two turnips moving, because the turnips move together, and there are two turnips a foot long, to make the turnip move; and then tie the thread which is among the joints to the turnip, and the other thread to the feet of the other turnip, and each master ties his turnip to the entire thread, and the masters put the spine in an equal place as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef,
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the knee
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	It is known that the joints of the knee and the shoulder only come to dislocations, not as with other joints; and the joint of the knee is swollen in four parts: inside and outside, and before and behind; and closer to these, it is swollen more before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is known that the swelling of dislocation inside is such that when a diseased leg is joined to a healthy one, it becomes longer, and the patient's knees are wider than those of the healthy person, and they cannot double their knee-joint by heat; and the pus that forms near the inflamed area is thick, because the blood from the femur vein comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who has this accident, is that these signs are contrary to those that precede.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	But the signs of him who has this before, are that he has a straight leg according to completion; all goes well, do not double bend the knee in pain, and if you want to make him walk, it will not happen beforehand, and he retains his urine, and swells the groin, and when he walks, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who has this behind, are that he cannot stretch his knee nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and there are swellings on the crotch under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this resemblance of dislocation are that you will return if the dislocation is old and it stays according to its disposition, there being no cure; and it does not seem wise for him to have presumptuousness.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this one where the dislocation is fresh, and it's of four kinds, so hurry that you return the joint to its place, and push it inside and further back, and let it move again with your right hand and left hand; by chance if it returns, and there's no need for any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, you must choose one of the ministers to come and take firm hold of the leg with two hands, or tie it above the knee; and one other minister extends his hand over him in that manner so that he pours his hands below his seat, then tightens a strong cord on the chest; and one other tightens the head with a rope; and they all extend upwards and downwards once, until the patient is lifted up from the ground once, and stays.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to four kinds of injuries, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If it is not so, then it is advisable to apply treatment to its appearance When the dislocations are in the arms, it is advisable that you lift the patient on his cost side, then put a bandage at the root of the elbow, and let him lie below the angle, then tighten the bandage towards the angle, and towards the furrow; then take hold of other servants their arms, and embrace the swollen arm of the sick man, and extend it to the outside form: if it returns to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tie it in that manner which we have said, then it is advisable to tie both feet and one arm of the sick man together with a strong rope on both heels and both knees; and let the sick leg be extended two times more than the others; then hang him by the head of a post, and above the ground two long arms; then command one servant to embrace the head of the elbow, and have other servants stand beside the sick man, who will embrace in such form: for now the joint is returning very quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are at an end, treat the patient as we have said in those who have gout, and cut the tendon on the diseased leg precisely, and on the joint just as; then put two pins, one on the head and one on the other side of the foot, then place a pin between the joints of the diseased person in the shape; and set up strips of moist cloth around it so that the patient does not bleed, then stretch each of these servants towards him, and tie the ligament to his hand with the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not return, place the patient on a stool, and press as we have said in those who have gout, and treat the patient with the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when dislocation occurs in front, it is advisable to stretch the ill limb quickly, and as I have said; and put the weight of its pain on the angle of the ill body, then press with the other hand, and extend the leg towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not advisable to extend the ill limb further or lift him up on the ground, but rather to keep him as he was when he fell backward, as we have said when lying down on both hind legs; and so put his weight on his face, and stretch out his joints as we have said before, and do press on the joint at the table; and will be at point when the ill limbs are extended, and they will be even; then add the splints, and apply plaster, and the bandage of a strip, so that the hind leg does not move; and if he rests for three days or four, then lift him up, and put on the plaster again; and if you see that they are even, as before, and leave the bandage for three days; then lift him up, and make him walk well, until his limbs are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the shoulder joint dislocation.
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The genou is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; but it should not be dislocated at the front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his knee to his groin, and if he does not straighten up his knee, then it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you have him sit upright, and stretch out his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and put your foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and press between your two hands, then bend both knees of the knee form; and one other minister stretches his leg, until the genou returns to its place, and the sign is that he is able to straighten his knee lightly; and apply plaster to it, and make him sweat with the knee to the groin, and let the limbs be put together for three days or four, then loosen it; and do not trouble the patient again until the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not present at all, stretch it very widely, just as we have said in the treatment of the hunchback, until it is made sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	from a dislocated foot
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The feet are sometimes swollen, and sometimes reduced to their original size, and in some cases they swell up again.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And when signs are there that the ankle is swollen, and tense before the part where it has been reduced: the remedies are lighter, and you must extend them lightly with your hands only when they are simply swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely reduced, it is advisable to seat the patient upright, and make him lie on his right side, with his knee bent; then take the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then raise it upwards, and pour the bone into the top; and do this twice, as we have said, pouring and withdrawing the bone; if it remains, that's good; but if it doesn't, if it returns, because it will return; and if it cannot return thus, seat the patient on his back on the ground, fasten a splint firmly in the earth between his hips, and tie bands around him, so that he does not bleed from the wound; then tighten the knee joint, and other joints extend the foot to your hands or to its binding, as it is bound above the neck of the bone; then extend each of these ministers equally, and let the splint be adhered between the hips of the patient to retain him when you stretch him; then put the mirrors equal on the dislocation with your hands, and other ministers tighten the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return suddenly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	Injury occurs at the point where he strikes so it applies plaster and poultice above, and tightens the strain and fastens the leg to the ankle, and guards the nerves that are on top of the knee, lest the ligament is too tight; then let him rest for two days or three, and if the strain fails, tighten it; then release after four days or a quarter, and wait until the patient can walk again for four days; and if he goes beyond this time, it's not surety that he will dislocate further.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess comes up, it is advisable to make him comfortable, as we have said elsewhere, until he recovers.
des dois	of the two.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two limbs are dislocated, it is advisable to stretch them out with care, and it's a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the shoulder joint is dislocated either from behind the back or from under the foot, it is fitting that you sit the patient upright on a level surface or on a table straight. Then put your foot on what opens up at these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until they return; and when they are equal again, and nothing opens up, put beneath the foot of the plant one table at two knuckles, then form an X, and leave three days, then release; and make him rest, until he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and you want to restore it, many times the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not long used it, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow down, nor harden; and use calming treatments for the abscess at first, leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see any hope of recovery; and when you see hope, now set the member in place as soon as the abscess heals; and when the member is back in place, administer calming treatments again, and cure the wound, as it seems fitting, with dried bandages; and if with the dislocation there is a breakage and small bones are fractured, set them and do what we have said for simple illnesses; and beware of entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will bring you more harm than good, as it is in accordance with your Creator, and with the wisdom that has armed you and your body.
Amen	Amen
