O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear sons, I have completed this book that is behind the science of medicine, assembling its completion with its explanations and by my declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in vision that I would complete this with your treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is twisted and distorted in our region and all around it, if the science has perished and been lost, and nothing remains except for small descriptions in books of the ancients who have moved their hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this arose errors and weaknesses, and the intentions were closed, and the science was moved away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems that I made a mistake, the text is not provided. Please provide the text and I will be happy to translate it line-by-line into English as requested.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because of that reason no good masters of the hand are found in our time, the art of medicine is stretched.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who enters into this art to understand anatomy, as Galen says, in order to know the joint of the bones, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and joints, and the number of the bones, and the movement and stillness, and the cause of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the nose is very small, and the ear is small as well; and similarly in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	And so, in the introduction of this book, I say that whoever is not well-versed in the things said here, will be careful to avoid error and not harm others; thus I have had many times more to deal with those who intervene in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a fool of a physician who cut the abscess on a woman’s breast or neck, and cut her arteries as well; for that reason so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another physician who treated a large stone in an old man, and he removed a piece of the bladder with it; and three days later, the man died inside his own house.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have often called for the treatment, and seen the patient's condition and the size of the wound, and I know well whether it will lead to death.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another physician who treated the duke of our land, who had broken his leg and contracted an infection, and with ignorance he tied the break to the wound so tightly that he wouldn't let it heal, and thus I ended it; and he commanded him not to untie it; and he stayed like this until the leg was completely swollen and the pain came to a point of death.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untie his leg; and when I heard it had been dislocated, he was in a good state and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all corruption of the flesh was already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until all the members were completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And behold, another mirror that will destroy and enchant, and then inflame due to the evil power of its sign.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humors, does not deserve to be touched with iron unless there is no remedy available because what is corrupted can be extracted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And dearly sons, you are in need of knowing that the work done by hands is divided into two sections: namely, to know whether it has danger or fear in various dispositions; and I will show in each one of these books where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For what reason he is necessary to protect you, so that the physicians cannot speak ill of you. If you take up your arms in compassion, and take your sick lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that through God's grace you come to salvation and are praised; and leave the terrifying diseases of bad health; and put away your weapons of what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	The Galen's says in some of his teachings: "Do not take care for any serious illness, lest you be called a fool physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are on fire cautery and cold medicine, and the chapters are ordered from head to feet; and about forms of ulcers, iron tools for cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and ventilators and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered and the forms of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and the ordering of the head just like it was broken into pieces, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Also that we remember the work, it is necessary to say which quality of aid and nuisance each condition has.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and the nuisance are the longest words and subtle science, and the secret answers; and many wise men speak about them and agree on this point; and they caution us not to repeat these words too much, because they are lengthy.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery is universally beneficial for all humors or whatever the nature of them may be; and it is so to two kinds of humors: namely, hot with matter, and dry with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry humors that contain matter, some have said and claimed that cutting is great assistance; but the others said the opposite: that cutting is of no use to diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated with heat or cold; and it says that those who say the opposite are wrong: that cutting is great assistance to hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you examine the body of a man and his moisture corresponds to the hot humor, you find the body frozen.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with these words.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And not even a single way can be entered without the one who has tested it, and who knows from long experience the cautery of burns, and the diversity of human constitutions, and the inclinations and causes of their diseases, and remedies and space for treatment; we have no doubt whatever about other constitutions, in the same way as in cold and moist maladies.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all wise men concur and agree on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that cautery is gathered from fire so it is one of the secrets of cures, and has more good effect than cauterization with hot medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire cautery, it is simple, and does not come from fire unless it is applied to the member that is burned, and does not affect another member unless it is named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Medicines applied to one member can move to another in causing illness or healing, and by chance the fire may harm the patient due to its height and the subtlety of its substance, unless there is excessive flow.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and through long service and study, which I have applied to the art, and it was on the verge of truth; and for that I make excuses for the length of my words, because I do not like to reveal the secret that is in fire, and its quality, how it cures bodily diseases, as the philosopher said while demonstrating.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, when they agree on what times should be made the cauterizations, and choose to pray for.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is beneficial in all times, because the evil that is stored beneath by the aid of cauterization; and itself, if the cauterizations are done for painful necessities and sharp wounds that cannot wait until greater mischief comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think that dear son, how the foolish people do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say so; but it's not as they imagine, because cauterizations are not a medicine that changes the complexion, but dries out the humors that cause pain, and brings relief in a short time due to its value, and through the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	In case the disease occurs only once according to the patient's complexion and the nature of the disease and its virtues; and the superfluities are assembled in it by acquiring meats and similar things, unless you administer cautery on him when he has a little superfluity and moisture, just as cautery for teeth because of pain and the similar things, but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	Many people do not understand why cautery is called the backside of medicine, and it's just an illusion; but they don't believe that cautery is worth anything after medicine, their thoughts are false, and cautery is considered the backside of medicine because when we administer various types of treatments for no disease, they don't work, so then we administer cauterization, and it's valuable.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	And then open well that cautery is good for the backside, not according to the foolish opinions of the doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery with an iron instrument was more effective than one of gold, and they said that the fires were used only because of the quality of gold and its substance; and they said that the iron cauterizers do not cause rotting, but it is not true for me because I have proven it, and found that it is not true in some people; and cautery with gold is more effective than with iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And know that when you heat an iron instrument, you do not know whether it is hot from the color of gold, and as soon as it cools down; and if you heat it too much, they make it in the fire; and thus there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cautery which we have used before on our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or your have ordered this chapter to deal with the lower part of the body first, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	the olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and due to the cause of an illness called "soda", and due to many humors that flow from the joints and ears, and numerous headaches and pain in the teeth, and throat, and the same illnesses that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged with medicine dissolving and mollifying the head, three times a day, according to what the virtues and the oil and the custom of the sick person can bear; and then rub the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit cross-legged, and place your hands between his hands, and put his hands on some cloth; after placing the root of your palm above the root of his neck, between his two eyes; and when your fingers come to it, if it bleeds a bit, then take out the cautery which is called "olivare", because this is the shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put a new cloth on the patient, and make him sit cross-legged, and place your hands between his hands, then placing your fingers one by one in twisting motion; then lift your hand gently, and reward the patient if you see a little bone; and if not, continue with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you before; after take some wool, and put it on the cloth with olive oil and soft cotton inside, and place it on the patient, and let him stay for three days; afterwards put a moist linen cloth in butter, and leave it there until the wound is healed; afterwards treat the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until he is completely cured.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they say the old men, that when longer the wound stays, the purging is more; and therefore it helps to bleed.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say any of these that one must strip the cauterize so much of the bone is burnt, and then put what is burnt with the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say another that one must cauterize so much, and push it as hard as you lower the bone just as large as a wooden dowel that women put in their stitches, because that way the humors come out loose; and one should strip the wound for a long time afterwards; after that one cures and binds.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem to me to be entirely good in all things, whether by fire or in some men where there is no fear; and it seems to me that one should leave alone; for the joints are weakened by repeated solutions of nature, as we testify in other parts of the body; and even when the joint of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salve and healing for me, therefore I use over this remedy.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of old time great pain of the head.
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When all of the head comes to chronic pain and lasts a long time, the patient must use the medicines and pills called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, oils, and plasters; and if they are made the cautery that we have just mentioned, it does not benefit.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be cautious if the head of the sick person is of great power and will not be too cold; then the cautery should be done as we have said before.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After doing the cautery on each of the corners of the head where the bone is, as we have said before, and doing the cautery called "vasselz"; and it is in this that you put ventouses; and oil your hand so that you do not see anything where the bone is: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of that later; and it is fitting that the cauteries of the corners should be more subtle than those of the eyelid of the head, which is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Instruct the patient to apply fire cautery to the head.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When there is sudden pain in one part of the head and the disease spreads to the eye, and the sinuses are purged with medicines that take time, and all the other treatments have not been effective; then apply fire cautery according to two methods, namely by hot medicine and by fever.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The fire cautery of hot medicine is such that you press a dose of alum onto the skin, and strip off the scab and apply again over the sinuses; then make an incision on the temple where the pain resides in this manner that you can put back the dose of alum under the skin; and when it has been applied so that the wound is tight and secured, leave it for 12 hours; then remove the dressing and treat with hot alum, and leave the wound open for 2 days or 3; then cover with a cloth soaked in butter until ulceration occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until it is healed; and if you see whether do this with any medicine burning that I have written or prescribed to treat medicine burning.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of what is this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or has little bird beak and a small appearance; and you place on the painful spot, and hold your hand tight and turn the knife a little lightly, until the red part of the pain is burned; lift your hand that the artery does not burn, which is behind, and drain abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Instruct the patient to put cotton in the wound for three days; then put linen on top of it for three days; next put moistened cotton in butter, and cure the limb with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this inflammation with the cautery called "cultellare", hold the entire point, and be careful not to cover the artery in that inflammation which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of inflammation.
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	As you cure inflammation as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit from this, and seeing that cauteries beforehand mentioned about medicine and iron do not bring relief, then it is necessary to heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and so apply a hot line of half a thumb's breadth on the limb, and lift your hand once, and strain yourself so that you do not cover the artery and that it does not return to its place; and be careful about the mandible which mutates when one eats, and let no nerve have regard except for numbness and spasms in the patient, and beware of the corruption of blood from the artery when it is cut, or when cutting comes great fear and also harm to that person who does not know how to deal with it, and who is inexperienced and has not been proven; and leave the wound to its own course; but I will tell you how to preserve health when the artery is cut, and I will show it to you in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	Instruct the patient if you see that this fire cautery does not suit the illness, and the patient suffers greatly, cauterize it in the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is sound; and if you see, administer the fire cautery which we have said or chapter of extracting an artery, with the fire cautery that has two cutlets; and this fire cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of ear pain from a frost bite
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When ear pain comes from a frost, and you have tried the soluble medicines and other cures which we have said in cutting, and the pains do not go away, then use this fire cautery which is called "poins", because it is like this:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After poking around the sick ear, or near the II parts where pain holds in both, and you're a little bit away from the root of the ear after marking it with an instrument, then mark X points between each ear; after treatment let them be healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that should be cured by cauterization alone, and it is of those that move with pus, just as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make a cauterization for symptoms that come from ecchymosis and pus from wounds.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this semblance of torture that is muffled by pus and purulent discharge, and swelling of the head and gargarism, then it should be cauterized with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another a little away from the temple, and the third near the junction of the two lips; and apply the cautery to the healthy part, so that the direction of the ear is set straight above a little below the cornicle of the head, and another in the temple about as long as our finger; and leave the cautery there until the moistness of the wound be dried.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the appearance of the cautery that we have shown before, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary that the cuts be a bit larger; after the cure, let him be as I have said, until he is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it in this way, and he does not profit from it, and the patient has no fever, then do four cauteries: two on each of the two horns of the head, and one on the forehead, and one on the "vessel" as we have said before, and a cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and treat him as we have said before.
de litargie	Of lethargy.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this sickness it is necessary to give the patient large and flat pills, of millet or poppy seeds for the brain; after that, make him drink his head full of medicine, and put the poppy seed ointment on the occipital bone, which is written in the treatment of ointments; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy in this way, good; and if not, make III cauteries on the two middle fingers of the hand, each one at a depth of I [two] feet from the base of the neck, and leave space between each cautery I [two] gross; and cure as with others, and if you see more blisters, then apply to the patient; and let them suffer if they do not make I cautery in the middle. And when it is done, II others on either side of the two horns, and cure until healthy; and apply those which are called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the frost of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is to be understood that the head must be purified with salt and what we have previously said. After taking the head from the patient, then make cautery on the middle of the head and on each horn, and one at the back and three at the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is severe, then make IV cauteries on the spine of the neck. Let it be left so long as the heat of the cautery subsides, and lift your hand; after the cure, until he becomes healthy, and apply those which are called "olivare" that we have previously said.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy.
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should only use fire cautery on one who is flaccid, and it is advisable to first soften the brain with years and other treatments that we have said in the section where the patient has great suffering and illness from pain of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, then make gargling and mastication to soften the brain often with bones meat; after reposing the head in mid-position, and make fire cautery as we have said before, on the flesh of the face, and each corner; and if the patient suffers greatly, then make fire cautery as I told one who had paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine at the back and neck; and use olive oil according to the way that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is sick, then they must perform the subtle fire cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are superfluities or corrupted moistures and great gout, then the fire cautery of parts we have said has paralyzed.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluities decline into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moistened, then give them something by which their intellects may be purified, according to what it is in front in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the chief of the patient; after making a linen band well made, like a circle, if you put it on the chief; and the patient binds themselves crosswise, and they must be bound in all parts; then present the linen, and anoint with melted butter from old sheep's wool; and let the heat temperate so that it may be able to be poured into them, and let it cool inside the chief; and perform this on each patient once a week, with another good government, until they are cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see someone being cauterized while they are multiple pokes with more holes all over the cauterization.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cauterizing also moistens the brain more, and then puts on a wet cloth in butter and gelatin fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eye
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye comes first from above by the signs I mentioned in division, then it begins and proceeds to do something medicinal for the patient, making him sweat or take a bath multiple times with water.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he asks to look at his head, and makes cauterization on the middle of the head, and makes a second cauterization on both temples if there is any weakness in both eyes together, or if it is only one eye that has weakness; then he cuts all over the cautery every vein and artery under the wound, and does them long as the width of the temple; and warns him to beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then he stains himself with too little power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incising carefully how to extract them; and never, at no time, is done cautery or hatterel beneath the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the eye's flesh
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or at the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is a superfluity cold and vaporous, then do the cautery as I said in the beginning, below the eye: cut off the eyebrow, and two cauteries above the two temples, and two cauteries beneath the two bones; and if there is more need, cauterize with great care under the eyelid.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Two wounds from inside the eye
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you have given the medicine according to what we said in division, and it does not benefit the patient, then give him three bitter medicines; after the king, and cut off his head, and do a fire cautery on the middle of the cautery olivary; and do two fire cauteries on the cautery called "clavilis" on the two sores, one lower than the shoulders; and beware of the artery that you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of olive oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery with this cautery called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	Because of which it is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see so make II cauteres on the II scars also long as the scar is; and do not leave the hand apart except until the third part of the paper is burned, as I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the single hair that points to oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There is no occasion when the hairs of the oil are converted to fat, and prick at the oil, and then do cauteries according to two manners: that is to say by fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their birth, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a sound place; after that make on paper around the eyes a figure just like the seed of myrtle, and as it is the beginning of the signs of hair growth; then put moist cotton in lard and musk of persillion on the oil, then take up the cautery of this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have drawn little by little several times, and the wound is healed at the right place; and the signs of health in the work are that you see the paper withdrawn, and the hairs raised towards the point of the oil; then lift your hand, and let it be thus for III days, then put moist cotton in butter until the eschar falls off; after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if this happens afterwards, when the hairs come in, and the skin is softened then resume the cautery on the same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are absent, cauterize them until the skin returns to its natural position, even and not pricked.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even, then make a bandage in the shape of a leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live chalk, one of each point, and grind them together well; and do it hastily if it does not cool down, then press on the form as if you had made it like a leaf of myrtle, and put paper over the eyes; and if the patient only has oil in their joint, so must you also apply it in both; and place cotton wool soaked in oil under the joint; and tie your own hand showing above the medicine, and press one point and move all the time that the patient feels mordication of the medicine, because he feels it just like from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if you owe money to the doctor.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the swelling has passed, if you lift the limb in a way that it is lifted again as it was before, whether by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this is not so, then put again the medicine on the limb or if the medicine has not worked, until your work is even, and your eyes are straight; then apply cotton soaked in fat until the wounds heal, after taking care of the limb which is called "dyafenis" (and others), until it is sane.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you think it necessary that you guard well your work with great care, so that the medicine does not touch your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	If the paper becomes moist after, and the hair pricks in oil, then resume the medicine on that part which is softened by its own paper, just as you did before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of applying fire to a soft myrrh.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to these so be your cautions; and do not be replied with the right way for those who have the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment for a fistula by fire cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula in the same way as we have told in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not profitable, then it is necessary that you apply fire cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position; and tie the nurses' hands around his head so it does not move or fall off its place; after putting wet cotton on the oil or persillion juice, apply the cautery which is tied like a bird's beak, assembled as if they were one piece; if you see, then point the cautery from one end of the neck to the other; and if you see, it should be so as if there was a tent; but this applies, this who has been tied values for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula until it opens up, and taking out the pus, and drying it; if it opens again, cut off the bowels; after putting on hot cautery in the shape of a beak, hold your hand to the cautery at the part not sensitive towards oil, so that you do not make madness; and put the cautery into the grease of the oil, and rot.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery procedure just after the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you do not come to the beginning of the cautery procedure just after the bone, then re-perform it once more, and if you have need to do so again, and let it lie for three days; afterwards put on a moist cotton cloth in butter, and let the cure with an antiseptic ointment until he is cured, and if forty days pass without his being cured, then put on medicine that corrodes the bone until the bone comes out; and do as advised according to what you will come upon in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a manner of cautery for an abscess that none of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Make sense of the abscess and sew it up; afterwards put in the wound a camel hair thread which is this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it to the quantity of one pound of weight; and keep your hand firm over the canal firmly, and do not move the patient at all, until the weights sink into his body; and it is fitting that you put on the patient some moist cloth wet with wine or oil: the weight sinks deeply into the fistula, and the healthy person recovers marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, then it's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not the case, then it is fitting to administer poultices on the wound, and bring the fistula back to the body of the wounded one according to what seems good in his own sight.
des crevaices en levres	of fissures in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Much of the time, cavities occur on lips that are called "poil", and at the same time in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When treating these cavities according to what we have said in previous chapters, and the treatment does not work, then use a small cauterizing knife with this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it immediately in those cavities until the juice comes out, after that treat with cerote as long as he is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has become rotten and dried up and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not work: then it is necessary to have a cauterizing knife according to the size of the fistula; after draining and closing the fistula, hold your hand until the iron awl comes out at the end, and do so once or twice, after the treatment as we have said, until he is healthy; and if it is cured thus, this is good; but if not, then it is necessary to discover the root and extract the rotting bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	Any movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, if you cure them with medicines, but that doesn't work, then put the head of the patient on a healthy bed; after scalding with cauterization, where the shape comes from afterwards in this manner that you place a cane on the tooth; and put hot cauterization in there very carefully, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after let go your hand and continue the cauterization according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with a salty solution, and leave it for an hour and rich fires.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the teeth that were moving become fixed, and the gums are restrained, and the moisture is corrupted and dried.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pains of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the teeth comes from coldness, or if there is coldness in the vein, and medical remedies do not help, then it must be necessary to cut according to two ways: and fire cautery and butter cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is done thus: you take butter from the milk, and put it on a iron or tin spoon; after putting cotton around the point of a tent, and applying the butter on the painful tooth, hold it until it cools down; and so do this many times until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see that the molten butter and cotton burn, put on the aching tooth again, and place iron hot above the tooth until the fire comes to an end at the tip of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Instruct the patient to take an iron or linen cord, and hold a chain of such size that it will not come near the mouth of the sick person; after heating, the form will appear afterwards, and place it on the tooth and keep your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be stayed on the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the sick person fills their mouth with good butter in the pressing of this cautery, and then the fat will come forward; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery on the head whatever you like, and according to what power you have; and this is the form of the chain:
des scrophules	of swellings.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are of mucus and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then apply heat to the cauterized head of hair so that it may follow afterwards; and have two openings for the fumes to emerge from the cautery on the other side; and put the cautery hot above the abscess once, or until it comes to a boil; and if the abscess is small, then apply cautery according to its quantity, and let it be so for three days; and place cotton wet in butter over the wound until it heals; after treatment with ointments and poultices until it is sane.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the snare:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moisture prevails on the channels of the gall bladder, and particularly when it comes from cold complexion, then it is fitting that patients be voided first by medicines soluble; after, apply cautery to the root of the throat, and take care not to come near the throat again, but rather burn only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to perform the fire cautery at the joint of the neck and head of the spine, as we have the shape "clavicle" before, and treat him in the same way until he is healed.
de la toust	from the touch
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the phlegm are caused by cold and damp, and the patient does not have fever or sweating, and it is an old disease, then perform two fire cauteries on the liver in their veins; and a second cauterization on the area between the two breasts; and cut off the "clavicle" according to the shape we previously mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see that, perform the fire cauterization by pricking on all of the pointed part called "points" because its shape is as we previously mentioned in the disease of the ears; and make cuts at a distance of just thirty or forty.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment according to what has been said, and if the cautery is applied three times as described:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because that makes the cautery lighter, because you do it three times in one go.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After this, apply the patient on his back and on his chest; after lift the wound that is inside the titillite with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then apply the cautery which has two nerves of the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	Instruct the cautery so that it cuts to the vein just at this cost, and comes out with the fugure of the cautery, four times; for this is made cautery with the three-nerved cautery, because the figures of cautery are these four cauteries; and they are nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And at times, press against this nerve because there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put the cautery on pearl-colored powder with silk; after make the patient rest, and do not let the limbs be long exposed for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if the dislocation occurs above, this happens little, therefore make cautery on thick corded cautery, or many cauteries in piercing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	The joint is closed, and the moisture has been removed and the wound has healed for the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When frostbites come into the stomach and there is a lot of moisture, and they are removed to their condition, and there are many purging movements for him, and such accustomed treatments, he does not benefit from them, therefore it is wise that the patient should be placed on his back, and stretch out his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After the third fire treatment, one cautery on the lower part of the nose with a spoon, by the quantity of two measures, all over the cautery hammer, and two more cauteries outside the two sides so that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and has the space between them equal to the space where they can be joined together when they will rot, and the cauteries are so deep that they pierce both parts of the flesh, and the figure of the cauteries according to this form so that they are adjacent.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	If you heat with great cautery in the belly according to this form; and if he has fear of this cautery, cautery in piercing and mark on the belly at that point according to the quantity you see of the needle; then the cautery should be done all over the thing called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the treatment we had before, until it is safe.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver hurts from heat and moisture and great ventosity, so that it is forced to change its natural composition by superfluous things; and the patients are cured of what we have said in divisions, but they do not benefit, if it suits that the patient be put under his heat; and sign of the needle III cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, excluding ypocondros, at the time when the cold comes out from here; and there should be space between each cautery the growth of a doe; and the cauteries should be done long along the body, and not press too hard; and let only the moist parts of the kiss burn, and the patient should be turned right on his feet; and if he cannot, so let him sit, and extend his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If your wish is, then cauterize these cauteries of the cutlery, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn all the flesh, because you would dry up all the body; and it will come to boil, for the flesh is very subtle at that point, and its wisdom allows one to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you see whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain that is not too great; but if it is in the membrane, he feels a severe pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure wants to drain the humors, it is advisable that the patient be supercharged on his head; and then he digs into the liver where the abscess is, and then heats the cauterizing instrument which has a shape similar to that of the bone.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	Instruct the patient to cauterize as much as possible until the skin is dry and the wound comes out, so that the burn may be completely gone; after the treatment according to the treatment of the wounds, until they are healed; and it's not wise to use any fire from this cautery except for those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these illnesses have been cured once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	And thus it can be done courageously; and to me it seems that wounds should not be left open.
dou cautere de pleuresin	How to cauterize for pleurisy.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for pleurisy one should cauterize with the roots of Aristolachia, and in this manner: take a long root of Aristolachia, the largest you can find, dry it, and make it as thick and as long as your arm; and coat it with oil, and hold it over the fire, and cauterize between the nipple and the neck, then a little more downward towards the chin; and cauterize between the fifth rib and the sixth, after a slight angle; and one cauterization on the belly, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations along the lower ribs, on the side of the one that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it as tight as if you were smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	Instruct any old man that no one uses the cautery of fire similar to shaving, and then they attach it with an iron rod between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and take away the fires so much pain as we have said in the abdomen of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work is great fear or the patient will die now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	from the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse according to what we have said about divisions of treatment, and it does not benefit, then there are three methods of cautery that all are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one there is a method where you do three cauterizations, or four, in the same manner as we have said regarding the divisions of treatment, according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand at all with the cautery, and let the patient rest on his back; and another method of cautery is such that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the wound where the mouse is, or when the symptoms come towards the left side, and lift the wound according to the wound, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries are according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Instruct the patient to heat two nails until they are perceived by the other side; and then burn the cautery, and so in four times will have done this. And if you see that, cauterize all of the cautery in three nails.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has been ten years since he got infestation by long vermin, and this is said to be equal to the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 cautery is not useful for dropsy, except when done in the way called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure according to the ways we have told in divisions, and your cure does not bring benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries inside the wound, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the mouse, and two behind the back over the spine, and one towards the hip; and let the cauteries be well close to the spot where the pain is.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the fire cautery heal for a long time, and not relaxing the patient after the cautery; and recovery would hasten, and all two humors would be present with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the abdomen is like a hammer that we have shown before; and it is olive oil on the back, according to what has been put there beforehand.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet.
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are filled with pus like citron, it is necessary to cautery on the back of the foot between the little and ring fingers; and lift your hand with the cautery turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And don’t enter too far into the marrow, lest it burn with the pus, and thus spoil the cautery according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even in each leg up to the point of the cutlery; and so hold the cautery on one long, one in front of the knee and another behind it, in the leg; and let the cauteries remain for a longer time until they bleed. After the cure of the other cures that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of stomach comes from cold and moisture, so that the digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are relaxed, and cannot be cured by any kind of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with a strong verture, do thus: perform one grant cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken before or the cautery for the stomach, at the cautery that circulates; and four cauteries subtle around the navel subtle, and two cauteries on the groin.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, let him be cauterized on the fingernail, and cauterize on each joint, and ask for cauteries on the stomach with the great one, because the treatment is advantageous when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of treating hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are located at the fundament, or one or more of them, and they have been old for a while, and are large, cold, moist, and corrupted humors, and if treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not profit, then do cauteries: three on the spine of the back, which is located behind the navel, and a little to one side, in a triangular shape; and two on the buttock. And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and you see swelling on the face, then give one cautery on the stomach, as previously said, and one more on the liver, and one more on the mouse, with all the cauteries hammered; and let the cautery work for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment the limb will be sane once again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "theleul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the fleshiness which is named "theleul", if it seems like a rasp, and then puts it entirely on fire above the part cut off; and let go of your hand while the cautery comes to life at the root of the vein, because the blood stops; do this once or twice, and if there is much fleshiness, cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment with ointments, until it is sane again; and if you cauterize a great cautery on the flesh, it will give more aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound badly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear tightness or opening, which we will recount in his own words, if this illness comes upon him that he cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is an ulcer and it has become inflamed, and putrid matter and moist spots have corrupted it, if you prove to see all of its depth in a subtle tent, and guard that you know the extent of its depth.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After applying the cautery that seems like a razor, and pouring it into the ulcer according to the quantity that it has entered, and repeating the cautery until the rotten and corrupted flesh are burned, once or twice, depending on the amount of matter; and be careful not to irritate the nerves, and great pains.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	In case the fistula is in the course of the vulva and the intestine, if you observe these signs, and do not perform these procedures only on a charnel [corpse], think that they are not human; after cure, let him be treated until he is well, and if his limbs are diseased, and the materials are hardened for long time, then know that his limbs are completely cured; and if the materials are not hardened, know that his limbs are corrupted, and the bones are rotten to death; and in this manner, as one of these that we will say in his presence.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from a blow reaches the kidneys, and great swelling, and does not abate even in a woman, then it is proper to apply cautery on both sides of the kidneys, on one side with the flail-like cautery that we have previously mentioned; and if the cautery is applied at the center, if three applications are made in line, and they offer more aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and shriveled due to injury and moisture, if it retains urine, then he does cutting (cautery) in the part behind the bladder, where the hair follicles begin, both on the right and left side, and cuts each one as long as the nail; and he makes it cut behind the back, wherever he may need it; and cuts according to the shape previously said.
de la marris	of the gallbladder
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the gallbladder is cold and moist, and does not let it form because of this, and its flowers are corrupted and their endings are delayed; and when they come, he feels great pain: therefore it is necessary to make three cuts around the belly, as we have said for cutting of the bladder, and two cuts behind the back; and cut according to what we have said.
de la hainche	From the hair
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the moist urine descends to the flesh of the cheek and because of this, it is mute from its place, and it is found that the cheek is longer than the other when measured together; and it is marked by the leanness of the departure from the joint, so it is fitting that you cauterize the patient on the flesh of the cheek with a cautery like the circle, and mark in front of the joint as it turns, so that the cheek lies within the circle; and if it is cauterized like those who have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, do three cauterizations of the large olive tree, and make them as deep as all the other wounds; and care for the patient until they are healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the groin
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the groin, and it's caused by cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division, but their cure does not work, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the great humors of fetid pills or other hard-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After cutting, and the method of the cautery is according to two manners: that is to say by assembling hot medicines, and cautery with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Cautery with fire is according to many manners, one of which is this: that you cauterize on the groin for three cauteries, and in this manner you make triangular cuts, of great depth and broad, and space them out so that there is a gap of the size of two fingers between each cautery, and use olive oil; sometimes it's done at the midpoint over the top of the groin, because there are four manners according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, so the fire cautery on the cut of the circle which we have said before in the dislocation of the hamstring; but do it in such a manner that the circle contains all the hamstring, and all the flesh around it be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way to do it in a sciatom (sciatic) treatment, when the pain lies in the hamstring, and does not reach as far as the thigh or the knee.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes as far as the thigh and the knee, if he does two fire cauteries in that place where the patient says the pain lies, and the first cautery on the ankle, one point to the left; and let the cautery be cutting (cutellaire), or let the thickness of the skin around the wound be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain is spreading up to two feet or almost to his knee, then cauterize at the place where he feels the pain three points or four.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	Instruct the master to do so if he wishes; and if it is done in this manner, when the pain is below the groin towards the thigh, perform fire cautery on the cutlery or circular cautery, and carefully guard yourself in all your cauteries that you do not burn the nerves and great arteries, and cause no greater nuisance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen others who were cautered on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the leg was completely swollen, and the toes as well, and they became discolored and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a remedy for the stomach that caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in both sides together, perform cautery in one and the other, as this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	Instruct the wise men to use fire cautery on the hainche, for this is the method. Make such a iron and put it in the chief as big as an anchor of dactyl, or somewhat less, and make it between the teeth so that there is space between them from one end to the other by the length of a little finger; and let the spaces be equal on both sides, and also like nails, and have iron hands well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated so that it is completely red and has senteles (sulfur), and then put it on the armpit of the sick hainche, and turn it onto its healthy side; let cautery be applied once, and let it sit for three days; then apply ointment of butter, and let the wound remain uncovered for a long time; after the treatment of pain until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its sharpness, and if you see little who use it; and all hope that is good cautery, which he can bear, and in which he affirms.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of medicine burns if you make an instrument between crossbars, in which the edge descends down from the margin of the portal, and is made of iron or of fire a long appearance, and at high has two, and is between each one the quantity of the thickness of a pair; and is over and above, and they join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the ghee of hazelnut on the patient lying on his side along his coast, and press quickly your hand much above the ghee of hazelnut; after put in between the two circles of the hot awl which is heated a little, and he leaves one hour double tens, and suffer him the patient the heat and the inflammation of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the mordication, it is true as for fire; and when the mordications do not pass, hold with your hand on the instrument and lift up the armpit of flesh, and let so three days, and apply butter until what is black from the ashes be extracted; and let him three days to rot in his strait, and that would be the rear aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended just to the thigh or just to the leg, then make an instrument that is held like the one I described in the armpit; and this is the way of hot water, and I have written it on treating the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alum and vinegar, equal amounts of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	If it has no small opening to prevent the point of a razor from entering; and cover that pot with another pot well filled with lead, and place above salt and chalk and water so, until you have two pots full of powder as soon as you take them in your hand; and leave it thus until it comes out blood and cheese or lead pot, then take all that and grieve over chalk and over salt as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And when it is very bloody and is being managed with the movement of old medicine and cauterization of other limbs; because all work done with fire, and with other medicines, where you cauterize well the vein as in this example and honey anacardi and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And the Galen tells us of a cure for one man who was cured of the pain in his thigh and sciatica, and praises it greatly, and says that no other cure is needed, and he became sane once, when this cure was done, and he bathed as he taught after this.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	Instruct the patient to press a fresh, green, and dry herb into the affected area, and pound it much with just a little fat, and place it on the groin and on the thigh where the pain is located, and bind; and let him lie for three hours and according to the quantity that the patient does not feel the pain anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then put it into a bath until the body is slightly swollen, and place him in bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And notice that no one should use cautery with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Galen says that when the varicose vein is cauterized with horse's tendon, if it helps a great deal; and in this manner must be done the cautery.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take a linen cloth and anoint it with old oil, and put it on the depression that is between the little toe and the great toe which they call the fossicle.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dried cheese (meaning probably a medicinal herb like myrrh) and applying it to the flesh so that it burns into charcoal, anoint with linen and let it burn until it stains; repeat again so, and do not cease doing this until you think it has reached the point where the pain will be gone, and when it comes to the hunch of the spine, stop; and this kind of cautery is called "cautery of cheese".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or concussion or from excessive blood loss, or as if there is material spread out cold, none of these symptoms warrant cautery, except for that which arises from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after these that the patient be free from fetid pills or other similar things on his back, where the pain lies, three lines signed to burn with cautery, and in each line, either a cautery or more according to virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and the cautery shall be done as is called "poins"; and if you see, do III cauteries or IV at the cautery of the clavicle median according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow spine when they rise up, and fear; and you will find in the lower back of the spine on their back and in this appearance which appears on other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it being cured, if you cautery with the cautery of a cell according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery is applied to each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, when the fire is applied on the spine within two or three lines, and the points are close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the treatment of the patient as long as he is healed according to what we have said, and be careful that you do not apply fire in goutiness which is in pain of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of joints.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is caused by moisture that has spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes into the foot, which they call "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicines, if it is cured by fire in this manner: make a poultice of fire on the joint of the foot, and use olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	If there is a sore where you must prick on the face of the foot, then do fire cautery to all the cautery that we claim "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	If the pains come just to the groin and other joints, and this happens often, do fire cautery on each knee III cauteries or IV of each part, all the olive oil cautery; and if you need more, do it again, but do not hold your hand in the fire longer than until the spice is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	If the pains descend just to the groin and on the back, follow the cautery we have discussed in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	If the pains are in the hands, prick 2 lines into the flesh; and if it does not stay sore afterward, prick again on each joint and on the skin of the hand; if pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and do good treatment for the patient with medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	If you do good governance and purge the flood, then you will be made whole by God.
de la routure dou syfac	From the surgery of the spleen.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the spleen is cut with pitch and the bile descends into the veins and it's new, you should wait until his wounds have healed before doing that again; and use things that ease his belly so that his bowels come down from his belly. After that, make him lie on his back between your hands, and tell him to tuck up his thigh as long as he can feel pain in it, and pull them tight to your fingers, and sign with a cut above the bone of the finger; then do the cautery according to this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	So long as he is white and his senses are clear.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then extract the bowels at their site; and let the physicians grasp his hand so it does not return to its place; and work well on the patient, putting a cloth and a servant over the knees, and another over the leg that grasps the hands; then put the cautery on the sign of all your fingers, your right hand and your thumb as long as you touch the bone, and if you do not touch the bone the first time, it will recur again for as long as you live until you have touched the bone; and be careful so that the bowels do not escape when you make the cautery; lest you burn them; and so that the patient may not die, or suffer another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	Instruct that cautery in children should be subtle according to the measure of each one, and of great men also great according to their measure; after three days cure him with burre cautery until the scar is removed; after the cure of other ointments until he is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days above his wound so that it is well covered; and it should be recommended to them to remain still long enough, so that the boil does not burst when they come to go in chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, give him a well-made bandage and tie it for forty other days; let him have good rest, that he works little and avoids excessive drinking of wine and eating, and speaking too loudly; and if you follow this teaching, he will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after the treatment of cutting on your chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the surgical incision of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When other incisions occur in the belly and are known, and you see that they do not grow again, perform the cautery treatment according to its quantity, and take one-third of the temperature; after this cure, as we have said. And none of the ancient ones said that it should be cauterized at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the shape of the wound with an incision and make a line for the width above the cut, and another one afterwards, and take hold of it all with your whole hand to apply the cautery knife.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cuts are lighter and less painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any member, from a fall or from an injury, and that pain lasts for a long time, and medicine cures are not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery called "poins", and do the cauteries according to the length of the limb and its thinness and weakness and virtue and its location regarding twists and pains.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If there is healing from the first cauterization, that is good; if not, repeat the cauterization on the same spot, because it is customary to make the member move by its proximity, so that you should do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Of surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The trouble is not cured by cauterization with great help, and the disease itself that comes from the rot of worms and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	You can see cauterization, take precautions if the disease is at the beginning, and cure it as we have said in the division, and do not insert or stay there, and doubt that corruption spreads throughout the whole patient, then cut cauterize on the head: I put new dressing on the head, and the other towards the front of the eyebrows; II on each horn, and I behind the neck, and let as long as your hand is free so that cauterization comes just to the bone, and until skin peels off so that vapor of big humors can come out; and cauterize on the flesh according to what it is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the malady is spread all over; and it manifests itself, so it is advisable to cauterize with those cauteries which we have said about in the head, and one cautery in the nostrils, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one on the groin, and another on the other spot, and two on the shoulders, and two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the cavities of the hands; and beware not to burn those that are found under the skin calcifying, so as not to burn them; and never do a cautery on the bone of the finger, or another on the bone of the stomach, or another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And you know that when you do more cauterizations, the patient's recovery is greater, and they profit; and you know that the sick do not feel any pain in the cautery as much as they feel it when they are healthy, because the body is entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the fire cautery be great or small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in different kinds of tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the treatment, apply a mixture of flour and honey many times until he is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When an inflammation comes into any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then the fire cautery should be applied to the member according to its size and smallness; and if the cautery is inserted a little in the flesh where the pain is located; then the treatment of ointments until he heals.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes the cautery is done by hand and with a foot and on the back, at the end of the nerve that silences the member, and thus if it is withdrawn; and no one should get involved unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	of leeches
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "leeches" is weakened, and the art of medicine offers nothing, then cut with cautery on one part of it, according to the quantity of the affected place, until the pus is drained off, and its color changes; then treat with a mixture of flour from wheat and lentils with olive oil and leaves of plantain, and salt of colon and salt of alondre, each in part; and mix everything together, bind it with a cloth, and apply to the patient as long as he is cured.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When chancre comes to the beginning, and your sight stops, cut with cautery around the circle that seems whole inside the turn of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all the wise men said that you should apply fire cautery at the center of a chancre; and all of them do not seem good to me, because I fear it will be ulcerous and corrupted, and I have seen no time that it would come to this; and there is no other more dire thing than being cauterized inwards, as the "circule" fire is called, just like we said about many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be killed
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some people have a disease called "adubelati", and it lingers in death or because of the overflowing that it makes, or because of the old age of the patient when he is decrepit (that means being very old) and has little blood, or because of time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it inwardly with many small cauteries, after that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	She will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced by the cautery at all of the fire, then the fire is so hot that it has this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand midway in that disease which is called "adubelati", until the cautery pierces the liver, and so that the cautery be cut like this that the patient feels pain from it in such a way that the flow of the pus is arrested.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cautery with fire by iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease which is also called "corrodens", and it's nothing other than a gangrene, because it corrupts the limbs as much as the fire corrupts the dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a person who can bear the fire cautery, then use the small and large cauterizations according to what is suitable for the patient or the disease; after cautering all parts until you remove all corruption, so that nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let him lie for three days, and put on small cauteries to suffer the burn with oil until the scalds of fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After this treatment for sprained limbs.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that a healthy limb does not form, it is good; and if this does not happen, restart the cauterization on the one that has remained corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this sickness has never been cured by medicine water in place of fire cautery; but fire cautery is always more effective aid, and I have already said the cure for medicine water in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of pearls that come to the bone.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often happens that a bone by accident gives birth to a sickness called "clos" according to our intention, and it's a great defect that causes the bone to break.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And there are two types of fire treatments for this sickness.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	Which is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is to heat the head of hair like a heated needle, and it should be made from good iron to penetrate the nail in all parts, with subtle edges; after that, put it on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until the blood reaches the font of the nail; then let it stand for three days until pus begins to form; then make an emplaster from fresh mallows crushed with vinegar, and apply the emplaster all over the night, and the nail will come out and be desensitized from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the joint of the elbow by applying a kind of poultice to warm it until it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by force of the body, and it often happens in hands and feet, it is fitting that you apply fire cautery with hot water; and it is done thus: take a cane made of iron or wood, or a feather quill, and put a clot on top of it and an alum; so as to burn warts; and place the cane so that it pricks everywhere, then put a little warm water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the margin of the cane comes to the root of the clot, and can find the hot water running all the way down to the root; and let the patient suffer a bit the burning with hot water for an hour; then leave it as is, and it will dry out all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Make a bandage after another until you have searched through all those who are in the body; then treat the limbs which have been constricted.
li cure dou trembler	Treat the patient with shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some are trembling from cold, or from fever, a quarter, or from another cause, if it is fitting that you make four cauterizations above the spine on the back, one cauterization between each spine; one cauterization at the shoulder, and one over the stomach at the olive cauterization; let them calm down, and hasten to cure the disease of the cold fever.
des pustules puans	of yellowish pus.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never do they appear by chance in the body, or yellowish pus, that come from large corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary to perform cautery on each head of the boil: a subtle cautery of fuselage of myrtle, so that the point is grasped by fire, or from the root of aristolochia long, or with the cautery lens.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And at no time do you cut when they first appear, according to this method, and it cannot grow in size or increase forward, but the superficial swelling that comes out is broken down, and it heals; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when an artery is struck.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often great bleeding occurs from the artery that is struck at the wound, or at the incision of the abscess, or with the cautery on a limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to be stinky.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Instruct the patient to apply a hot cautery to the wound as much as possible, so that the discharge does not occur again; then put olive oil cauterizations of various sizes, both small and large until they are all red; then, take one, great or small, according to the wound and let it see where the artery is routed; and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it catches fire when you lift your finger over the vein, and the cauterization has burned out, then take haste to get another from the cauterizations that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after another until it is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is near, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when the blood does not flow from the artery, one cannot stop it oneself when the artery is great, unless it happens by one of the four ways we have said: or through cautery, or through extraction when it has not been treated, or through strong binding with thread, or through medicines placed on which have power to stop the blood; and if it is tied and strained as a result.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will undertake the strengthening of a tightly wrapped bandage or placing things on it, or other similar things, if they are not profitable to do so.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has not a remedy or medicine at hand, he must place his two fingers over the vein wound as we have said, and strengthen it well until it stops bleeding from above the wound and above the vein; and do not move him, but let the cold of heat be applied often so that he becomes extremely cold until his veins are congealed and swollen and strengthened. And make incisions in the direction where it has need of cautery and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on treatments for stones.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	As we have said in the first chapter on all diseases by which it is convenient to use fire cautery or medicines, incisions and applications, and causes and symptoms and forms of the cauteries; and as I mentioned that book for the head just now, and I will go into this same chapter because one finds these things more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first cautery, and therefore you must take greater care.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to venture into folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who have been so afflicted with their disease that they easily die due to the force of their illness and the great severity of their malady; and because of this one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And to those who have given this their attention, and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the sick person is pitiless.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not for you unless you are agreed by those who come to you with this manner, but put more honor in your practice than in your desire, and do not act without careful consideration of what is in your power, and from that which you know, and from which you have experience; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your sick patients, so that their health may be converted; for this will help you to gain a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear children, Our Lord gives you good understanding and integrity, and if it please you to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I instruct you to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
dou chief plein d’aigue	with a full head of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	We know that this disease often comes upon children at childbirth, and when the nurse ties too tightly the child's head; and there is no clear cause for it that we can see.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease without children, and in all those that I have seen, it ended in death; and for that reason, it seems to me that I should try these remedies in part.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw that in one child the joint was swollen with water, and the head became swollen every day until it could no longer endure; and he thought so much about the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone above the joint, between the cartilage and the bone; and the wound is such that if you cut into the cartilage below the joint, then you make a large incision in the head as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows out; and look at how the shape of the spatula
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscess is larger, then you will do two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the signs that you observe are on both sides of the jaw, and the fluid bursts forth when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not return: then it is necessary to do three incisions into the skull according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture entirely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After straining the incisions with cloths and powders, and putting in wine and oil, and leaving it for five days afterwards; then set free, and treat the wound by poultices and ointments, and leave to drain the skull, and then give dry meat a little bit of moisture until the limb is comforted and sane.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another manner of incision is that you look at or open the large opening of the abscess, and gather up the assembled water; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right side, and sometimes on the left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Measure then the size of the abscess when you open it up and gather the water, and cut accordingly what you have the power to do; and be careful that you do not cover the artery; and observe how much blood comes out, so that the patient may die from the bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of the nose.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it has happened that a disease is called "cough" on the eyes or in the nose, and the disease is ancient, and the medicine cure does not profit at all, then the latest cure if is cutting with what you cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Instruct the patient to look backward when you cover their eyes; afterwards, rub them hard with a rough cloth until the arteries open up, then extract the patient's neck from under one cloth; afterwards, examine whether there is any vein bleeding out, and that the veins of both are after the ears, and they will not be returned soon; afterwards, sign the veins to close, then cut one and the other with a good spatula of II parts, until it reaches just to the bone, so that this is done over a large neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you look, pour out the spatula under the artery and cut it above, in the same way as it should be through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if you keep going down continuously to the top without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Et se li artere n'apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantite de l'espace de III doe, puis seigne d'enche et fent jus a l'os;
de emigrainne	They are going away
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old age comes and cough is good, because of moisture of tears and cold in temples and sores ancient and similar things, and it is treated with various kinds of medicine and no one profits from it, if we cut out the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have narrated.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way to extract them is that the patient makes his hair stand up on his temples, and listens for the artery opening in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not fully restored like in some people who are too cold; and if it is restored, he tightens the neck of the sick person with certain cloths, then frowns on him with any harsh cloth, and warms up the lower part with hot water until the artery becomes manifest; then he takes a spatumile of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Instruct the patient to scorch the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it up towards the head with pincers, and carefully separate the threads that are under each part; if the artery is subtle, turn the needle to the point of the pin, then strike at that place according to the quantity of two needles.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it is not struck, do not strike without causing pain in all its parts.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And pull the vein of six cuts, just as three; and if the artery is great, it is to be ligated with two levers of a double thread of strong silk, so that no purulence appears before the sound of the wound, and comes out in due time; then strike the superfluity which is between the two levers at that same hour, and then, if you see, since the cauterization with the cold cutlery up to the bone until the cuts are struck, it is the proper work, if the patient has no fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery, it is a remedy to finish the moistures: because of this it is more aid for moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, take out your left and fill him with clean wool and put on well-made tents; and when you draw them off, cure him with dry medicines that make charcoal, and with tents, until he is cured; and if not cut from the artery as much as you do work, then hasten to cover by fire cautery, or take out the vein of vitriol and strain it on your hand so that it does not become stained; and if you do not have this present, put wool on his vein as far as he will not be frozen, and let him cool in cold water until he is strained as much as it concerns; and what is more muddled and lighter to extract the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery with two parts, but the parts should be well-stuffed so that its heat lasts longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the instrument is too dark, it holds its heat less.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And must have two small knives one of which is a large mallet, and then when you apply salve to the two wounds, apply the hot iron so that it comes close to the bone, and cut the vein in two wounds; and be separated by two joints because there is no soldering with this cautery for all parts; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing into the veins that are on the forehead of the head, and it does not benefit from any medicine that is made, and you see the face of the sick person reden, and feel pain around the eyebrows as if from a blow; and the oil is thick and moist so that the hair of the face is wet, and the skin is scorched by the heat of the tears, it is necessary for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called him the "cure contused", and you must tell the patient who has this illness to let his hair grow long on the head, then make three incisions or equally according to the length of the forehead; and one of them should be as if two doves were tearing at the front in a downward direction just like that; and the others should be two, on either side of the paper, and you must guard from the cutting of arteries which are there above the papers; and hold your hand back from continuing with the two mandibles, and each wound is as thick as three doves traversing it; and take a piece of sponge and some cloth to soak out the blood, then pour in the salve good of two parts.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is just above the temple, to the second incision; and scorch all the wound between the two incisions as far as the forehead bone, then make another part from the main incision just to the other second, and then extract this splinter.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you prick with the instrument called "cultellary" in the first cut, and it is sharp from one side and soft from the other, neither cutting nor scratching, this is the shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the cutting edge sharp towards the red flesh at the wound, and the soft edge towards the bone, and prick until it comes to the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut off today the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is complete just as far as that which opens the wound, and then make another cut in the middle until the other side; and then remove the blood equally, and express the fluid because of the blood taken; then put a linen cloth in each cut, and place soft drapes soaked in wine and oil and wool, and guard that swollen flesh does not come out; and on the third day remove the bandage, and administer great quantity of fresh water, with ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments to cure wounds, until he is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Let your eyes rest
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any veins are congested and accustomed to that habit, and you see the eyes clouding up and darkening, and weakening sight, and papery things burning; and the hairs fall out, and pain is felt in the head, and the patient sneezes; then observe by these accidents that those matters and this congestion do not come forth except from many veins, and where it is, you should see it.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And instruct the patient to turn their face, then make a great cut on both sides of the forehead.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the wound on the left temple to the right temple, and make an incision just as close to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples that are moving downward; and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, then sew between the two lips of the wound with cotton wool and linen; then tie soft drapes soaked in wine and oil, and be careful not to touch the abscess; when it is closed, you should rub the bone until it starts to discharge, then treat with remedies that promote drainage, which are known as "jargons".
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take 2 parts of flaxseed flour and 4 parts of ground poppy seeds, and mix them together; and administer them in these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All those things that fall into the ears are among the four kinds: grains, or fat, or stone from mines, or similar things like metal; or seeds, such as jujubes, fava beans, peas; or fluid-like things, such as water and ashes, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear stone or some other kind of thing that does not fit in the ear and does not stick to the ear, if you put the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, put on some oil violet or olive oil, and then perform the extraction; and let it be turned out of the condyle, and stuff the nostrils with cloth or wool; and place a piece of cloth over the ear when it is turned out, and put the ear up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often the stone comes through this remedy; and if it does not come out, then you must perform the extraction with fine pincers, for thus is its form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it does not come out with the pincers, this is good; if not, you must extract it with an onion thread of fine double loop; and if it will not come out like that, make a chain of linen and pour water on the head through the ear hole very deeply, so that it cannot enter in through the chain; then take out the stone, for often comes out as we said; and if it does not come out in this manner, catch glue to pick up the stones, and put into some instrument with a point for that purpose, and put a little cotton inside; then press the glue on top of the stone or any other thing, and take out the stone.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she cannot escape from all these things that we have said, then hasten to pierce the ear so that an abscess forms in it, and spasm; and the manner of piercing is such that you first make the patient's head healthy, and extract the blood according to its measure, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or where it depends, and cut it out as if it were a moon, until you reach the bone; then, with your skill, extract the bone quickly from your mouth; and the cure will be as long as he is made healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's pus that is accumulated and it swells, administer the extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, then apply a poultice in this subtle form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that kind.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not cut it when you think the grain is moist because of moisture in the ear, unless you have made many cuts there first; then take out fine threads and from a vessel, as we have said, so that the extraction may be gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In water then what falls into the ear is fitting for patients to use an expectorant of condensed conditions, and fill the ear with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear or in water.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it falls through because of this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If this does not work, he should pierce many holes according to the length of his nose must be tied and light, and let him warm it by fire; and put the patient an earplug or plug in his ear, and sail it on one side of his body, and fix another piece on the piece that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this with bone and bone until the water dries out completely, and so falls the whole thing completely; and if you see it, pierce a joint, and pour one of the shavings into the ear, and the other side to heat, until the smallest joint is burned; then make another piece of joints as long as the water has dried out, just like we have said in the bone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of meat, if it is small in size, like a lump and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large in size so that one can feel it, extract it with pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove which exists in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the removal of worms, put some ear drops in the ears, when you cure as we have said in the division and treating distillations; but if the cure does not work, then it is advisable to look at the ear in sunlight: if no worms are found, take a small needle to gently extract them; and if none are found, prick with a small pin because this is their form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And be narrow under and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And pour the most subtle head in the ear according to the quantity of pain in the patient, then follow by forming a total cauldron; do this often until all the veins come.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then put cloth on the vein like I said in the stone; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations just as the ancient ones have done in the cutting of worms, and you will find them or use the treatments for distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with this instrument, because that is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if it is of silver or lead is poured into the small openings, and above overflows for distillation; and to press in the distillation with the well-made instrument of lead, and if you see a razor and wrap it around the point of the vein; then pour your oil or juice, and that which you see of medicines in the canal, and the vein be in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand carefully until the oil is distilled or just emerging from the ear; and the patient feels within, and let the distillations not get too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From the stopping of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in the ear; and this same thing happens to adults by stopping of the wound, or by cutting something inside the ear, and this stumping comes to occur sometimes from within the ear, if one cannot see it, and sometimes occurs without a hole, and the person sees well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That one which comes from within, if it cannot be seen, is due to inflammation in more dispositions, and in that case you must put the ear of the patient towards the sun; and look inside: if you see pus appearing, then the wound has this spotted form because there is this shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And if it is filled with pus and trenching before and behind all flat, if the ear does not bleed; but if the inflammation comes from a bone or part of the ear, if you have subtle fingers, and carefully cut until that charred thing is all bone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	If the blood pricking occurs at the root of the ear, take a fine razor and shave it gently and heat it a little over the bone of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the blood pricking that the patient feels great pain in the ear, pick lightly, and keep from greasing the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the size of the perforation, and apply Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and apply rosewater ointment, and powder on vitriol brulet; if you see an ebb of the ear, sooth the place that you treat with another tent moistened in croton oil and beeswax, until the swelling is gone; then cure as long as he is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood comes out from the wound, plunge an sponge in cold water and wrap it around the ear, and use other treatments that remove the decoration of blood which are for treating bleedings.
de la char des papieres	of the fat of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Bind the warts on the eyes when they are moist and dry, so that you stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and cut from a spatula of its roots; then apply vinegar to the affected part.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they do not fall off, if the cautery is applied to the lenticular part with fine fire, and after the incision, it brings forth wounds; and many times they recur, since nothing remains of their roots; and when those roots are cauterized by fire, they do not return.
de la gresle	From the horse
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	There come many times paper things that seem like gashes in their shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "grandine", which is an assembly of thick moisture on top and bottom; the symptoms are such: take care if grandine dries out from one side and the other, and it's a light thing to know; do then the donkey thus: cut it slightly wider, then scorch each part lightly, then pick it up with pinches, and strike.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it with a piercing just a little of the paper, so as not to grieve the patient; and if the crack is large, if the assembly has a seam, then continue the cure until it is healed; and if it's small, do nothing to force it, because the bandages restore it immediately and irritate flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	There is a grease that is sewn onto the net of papers above, and this happens to children who are born without anyone, and their eyes weep much for them, and they come with cathartes in the mornings, and cannot see towards the light of the sun because their tears fall on their eyelids; and for that reason they sleep on their faces afterwards, and they put themselves asleep, and their papers above their eyebrows are wet due to the exinach grease which opens up in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the liver with your two hands and feel the exinach inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is that the sick person puts his head on your healthy one; then take a linen cloth, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach in each part, then put it on him; press with your hands from both sides so that the exinach is assembled inside the circle; then make a cut at the midpoint of the moisture towards the spatumile trenching a large incision, and not be greater than the wounds we made in the vein; and make the skin tight up to where you see the exinach; and from further circumstances comes exinach from the incision, according to the shape of white fatty meat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull out the hair completely from one to two fingers at once, without any cloth, and turn your hand in both right and left so that it is even; and keep in mind that you should not add anything into the wound, lest you become affected by all the pus just until the oil has been applied, lest you burn yourself.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the cut does not open up immediately at the beginning of the wound, then apply a little to the wound lightly until it appears; then cut as we have said, then cover with cloth easily and coolly, and bind the leg.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who break veins and put them up to corrupt that remaining moisture.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the patient should be safe.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes to the left apendix hot, so the physician gives emplastrum salving as long as he is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of paper.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs of paper are born, other than nature, and have grown old, and touch the eyes, they cause trouble and bring about kinds of illnesses such as excessive crying and softening of the papers and albumin, so that it is due to the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is done in four manners: or by cautery with fire, or by astringent medicine according to what is in front of the chapter on cautery, and it is made either by incision and suture or by cauterizing, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the patient's head on your healthy one, then turn the paper of oil with your left hand; if it is turned, it is good; if not, then prick an aglet into the thread above; and either take the edge of the paper or tie to the hair that grows above these hairs, and cut the paper at all with a razor; then make in the part below the paper, under the hairs, so much as from the great laceration to the small one, cutting according to the quantity you see extract the thread, and put underneath the paper a small tunic of cotton and drapery, then sew above the paper an image of encaustic, like that of myrtle oil, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the size you saw extracting the paper which is devised on all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et if there is something that needs to be done, copy a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is soft; then do all that you signed on the two lines above until you get a large laceration just with a small cut; and let one of the incisions near the natural hairs in the size of a root, then pour it into one of the two corners where it is tender, then scorch it all; then assemble the two lips to a sewing stitch with an awl thread at every single thread of fine linen, and wipe out the blood, and make the inflamed part dry under the two eyebrows on everything that clings, if you have seen this before, do not have any care, otherwise leave the sewing and the threads just for three days or four; then treat the wound with sewing and constriction, because the paper comes to life in the sudden movement of the wound and its assembly, but the sewing is weak (as they said the old ones), and it’s a work with fear; and if there is another way: and it is that you sew the paper with a figure which is as like the fuel of myrtle, just as we have told, at three times of six according to the form that is here
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take care of those who are already sick according to equal powers equally, following the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you do not have the power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not even, then prick an needle or it has a thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert the second thread near the great suture, and the third near the small one, and assemble between your two hands the threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin where you have applied the signet, as we have said, then assemble the two lips of the wound with stitches, and the cure until it is cured; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then apply a mixture of croton and similar salve soothing; but sometimes happens that the hair of the scalp is transformed: so it is necessary to use what we have said about the incision; but the suturing in both cases is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Instruct the surgeon to follow this form: and it is that you will convert the paper and the skin inside according to what I have said, and then make two ligatures by art, and two subtle ligatures as long as the paper and the broadest part of the splint are; and cut at two points where you hold the fillets; then assemble one and another subtlety above that which overhangs from the skin of the oil, and strain the two ligatures from the two parts formed; and leave it thus for a few days, and the straining will die and dry and wither, and he will fall by him.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is late and the cut has great force, then treat him until he is sane; and when the wound is sewn and if the skin is lifted, and the hairs do not fall again; and that is the form of the two ligatures you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	Instruct the patient to treat the wound if it does not come out with the hairs, so treat the wound under all that hair you have ordered, until the blood comes out from above and you see it through your sight; then treat the wound and the thread, close the eye for two days or three, till the hair grows in its place and falls off the head; and if small hairs are present, accompany one long hair with the chest nature, and lift them up with that one till they are stretched out and then lift.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil’s spoilage
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness is called "aleacratic" or the spoilage comes to the oil, there are two ways of it happening: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens suddenly by wound, or by incision, or by cautery, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of it is that you cut open the wound, and serve the edges of it, and put inside linen tents, and tie them so long as they are clean; and it's not fitting to use only in the cure of things that dry up and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the sickness returns worse than it was before; but work on things that soften, such as fenugreek; and boil rose water or other spices, and seeds of linen, and apply a poultice made of melted diaquil oil, and wrap a tent around it, and treat with it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you give yourself protection so that it does not turn to a worse form than it was before; and this work that we have said is not made of fire only, but rather according to the shape in which the sickness first came.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the fat which comes to the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness, which exists below, is truly called "axacratic", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; and the way of the work in such cases is that you take an awl, since it has two threads, and pierces into the fat, and makes punctures on both sides until the threads appear in two joints of the fat; then pull the fat over all with the awl, and pierce at one spot a foot long.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what it ought, that's good; but if not, take the razor and put it in the wound, and turn the paper, and make two cuts on both sides inside the paper; and let the joints of the two cuts meet at the two angles of the incision you made; and do it so that when they are assembled, the shape will be as the shape of a letter with the no «I griesche» ; then take away that fat, according to the amount that is below its skin, from what follows the paper, then join the two parts that are missing, and sew with a thread of linen; then apply the cure for what we said about medicines for softening, and stitches, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et if the sickness comes from cutting or stitching or cautery, so it is fitting that you cut an open wound beneath the hairs of the paper-thin skin; and according to what has been said before; then cut between the second and third fingers of a tent, as I have said; and one must make the work according to the form of the sickness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare an instrument of all sorts of power so that it can return the figure to its natural shape; and the sick themselves, according to what they need of work and instruments, and in more severe dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	for suddenly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suturing has happened to the hands in some way that the paper above is swollen with oil white and cannot move or do its natural work, so it is fitting that you put the point of a rasping tool under the paper, and lift it up; and make an incision as punctures, until you copy what is accurate at the subtle spatula, which should not be too harsh nor too rough, so that the patient can suffer neither the spatula too harsh nor the oil to bleach; and let your incision, from which you scrape away that assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and it is healed all of that assembly, and does not happen again in the oily sauce salted with vinegar and sweet water, and milk; then put a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and put on the oil lard moistened with wheat; and after three days use the coliere and such rough things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the oil of the wolf
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	He knows that the wolf's joint is in two manners: it is nervous and looks like dried milk, and another which is not nervous but resembles congealed milky moisture; when touched with iron and cooked in its own pith, one cannot bear it anymore; and both resemble the great artery, growing little by little until they cover all the vein and all the light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient places his head on a clean cloth, then opens his eyes; and raises a piece of paper with his hand, then tightens the joint as if it were tied in little double knots, and puts it above; then takes an awl, and puts horsehair, or goat hair, or bull hair, into its tip, very tightly; and punctures the joint all along the awl, ties the joint to a thread, and stretches it above; then scrapes off all the hair on the cost of the joint, from the point where the blood comes to the root, until they reach the skin near the head; then cuts off the remaining part in the root of the artery for about half an inch, leaving the natural color of the artery, so that by the incision no corruption or inflammation appears in the veins accustomed to it; and sometimes the joint is only incised with a single puncture, and at the tip, as we have said; then scrapes off all the flesh in the fullness of its subtlety, until it becomes soft, which is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And instruct the patient to let the scab not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the prunelike thing be perceived; and after the incision grease in oil a little bruised cloth, and put on a poultice around the neck, and leave it for another day; then cure as he wishes until he is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not swollen and you cannot pierce it with the needle, and the nail cannot be inserted, this symptom of an ingrown nail is often cured with medicines; and it will sprout as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, apply oil to the patient, and take out the scab gently according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And carefully remove the ingrown nail, and if you see that it is not shrinking at all, and the inflammation presses, then distill from your mouth onto oil mixed with poultice made of lye, and apply red poultice with bruised cloth, and let the oil sit for another day; then resume the other work according to the same operation, until it is entirely gone.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is against you in the oil, as in applying poultices, then apply the poultice to the affected area, and cure it first until it is healed, and then resume treatment as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the skin with pus does not heal in the oil due to great discomfort, if it is spongy and he applies a small part, without making more cuts, so that no blood comes out; then distill in the oil a scarlet collier, which is made from litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of flesh that grows on the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	If some men do not get any red flesh, and cover the eyelid and restrain on papers and torn parts, as if it were a rose from balaustre; and the wounds are such that the patient puts his head in a clean place, then open the eyes, and coat all that flesh with nails suitable for this one, and support with strength; then cut the first flesh, and go cutting to the rasorer until to the end, and be careful not to hurt the oil at the treatment; and do as we said in the incision of the ulcer and small forces of which you should know what form comes after this chapter shows; and when the incision is completed and cut out all the flesh, then use the oil of sieil broiet or distill collier rouge and similar medicines corrosives, and put on the oil cotton with abin d'uef, so that it may be certain of the abscess; and if it remains nothing, and he does not get dressed, and you doubt an abscess, then let the oil and cure the abscess with soothing things an abscess; then return to your treatment until it is healed, and do thus coat the flesh in the oil by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	It is necessary that you alleviate the cure for each weak person on both natural and accidental roads in the presence of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see if this member suffers from the aforementioned injury.
des voines des eulz	of eyes.
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are red veins that are covered on the skin, and they tolerate the pressure of the eye, weakening the skin every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, it is necessary to see first whether the skin is inflamed, and if it is, for there is no other disease that burns like the inflammation; therefore, take care in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on a healthy pillow, then suspend those veins until one hour according to his wisdom, and so place those subtle veins doubly according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be two per degree in the four limbs according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then apply the force to those veins subtly, and suck out the blood afterwards another hour, until you see remove the blood forces from the oil; and beware that you do not strike the oil with the pointed ends of scalpels, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you only extract those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the oil rosewater and red to corrupt what is remaining in the wound.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to suck out all of it in that one hour, then apply a plaster on the oil with soothing things to relieve the pain of the eyes, and let it remain for some days until the pains are relieved and the abscess is secure, then resume according to this manner as before until they are healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	About the finger wound
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The arissati fistule: when you treat the wound with cautery and medicine, and it is not cured, there is an infection in it that must be cut open, at the abscess, where it must die, and remove all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption and blackness, if it has all the equipment of which this is the form; and it is called "aspercief", make a needle from the iron on the head, and prick it as sharp as a file, in the same shape.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press hard enough with your hand until you feel that this corruption is cured; and do this no more than once, then restore it with medicinal extracts.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the head of the shoulder is soldered and charred, and if it does not heal, and the body of the arrow is soldered and remains so for forty days, and it does not renew and is no longer apothecated, and worse accidents do not happen, you know that he is sick; but if this is not so, then there is only another way to return the fistula to the puncture in the neck according to this form: and it is that you uncover from the bone the second time by iron, and with medicines sharp, and when it happens uncovered again as much as before, and take three iron pins and make the fistula smaller just at the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put the stump on the bone of the elbow, and remove your hand from the wound a little, then turn it all around until you feel the bone and the patient feels that he is coming when you hold his hand over the neck; and since you restore the stump with dry medicines as I have taught you, when the head heals and strengthens the leather, then apply the matter to the neck; for this is a lighter thing on the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are cut to the end in all directions and do not come loose from the eyeball, or even slightly, if you choose to cauterize the patient; then clean, then put on bandages or poultices with a needle to suck up the discharge, then put oil made of ice and aloe and incense and saccharocolle onto it, and then strain the oil, and apply poultices over bands and drapes; and do so in the manner that you take soft cloths, double each one four times, and then place one on top of another according to how many there are to serve; then strain from above with a firm bandage strip, and reapply poultices to suck blood until it stops bleeding; then remove the poultices and let the oil constrict for day and night, and if they become loose again, tie them up more tightly, if possible; then untie the binding after a day and a night, and if you see the discharge stop, that is good; but if not, reapply poultices and drapes and bandages and needle and suck blood until it stops bleeding.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	A fall from a rope or a ladder
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a rope falls on the head, then opens up, and comes out with pieces of paper like grains of resin, it is astonishing to see; so if you cover your eyes, the injuries are such that you stick an arrow into the root of the part below just under it above, then stick another arrow where there is double thread from the shoulder; and pierce them, and leave the first arrow according to its disposition; then cut the new double thread and tie a portion of the head tightly, then draw out the needle and apply olive oil in abundance on the wound; and let it be so long that the threads stick with the head, then treat the oil on comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is held by the rope every part around a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show great appearance, then take the lancet in a subtle spoon that comes from within of oil, and remove the moisture albigne and descend the eyelids, and enter into them soon; then extract as long as they are sanitized.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the spoon of oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This sickness called "alcunnati" is not just the spoon of oil that is assembled in it, resembling water descending, but it's not water; and the way its appearance appears is such that you sit the patient on a stool, straight and upright, then take hold of their head with two hands, and watch how the spoon comes up to above your eyes; then let it be placed, do not remove, and see if they get better, or else light becomes dark for them, and see what is happening as usual; but if it doesn't come out below, know that it's water, and if the movements of the spoon are assembled like we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you place the patient between your hands, then take the thin spatula and apply it to the corneal conjunctiva with the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the crown, until the bowel is freed; and when she is out, distill in hot oil mixed with melted honey or fenugreek, or boiled wine and honey, then cure with another cure until she is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	As we have similar signs of the oil in the division, and what is needed to pierce it; if according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands crossed, and take a warm cloth from the light of the sun, and tightly bind the healthy oil; then put the paper of the oil on your left hand if your eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if your eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or on your left hand, if your eyes are on the right; then place the point of the instrument near the crown by the thickness of a thread on that flaky layer of the oil to the lower side of the minor lobe, then courageously insert the "almagda" and twist your hand until you pierce into the flaky layer of the oil, and feel when almagda comes to the empty thing; it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the space between the pit and the end of the nail; and this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then put the instrument just above the oil, or on its side; then press it from one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the pain of the fever has passed now, so see the patient in front of him and the instrument on his table.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After the small rest, and if the fever rises again, put force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, gently pull out the arrow in rotating your hand little by little; then put on a bit of cool juice and clean under that oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put on the oil a cloth or linen soaked in rose oil and a great quantity of ufe, and tie it with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and for those of our time, put on a linen cloth with an abundance of ufe.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the arrow cannot enter in the oil because of its hardness, because there are some men who have too hard eyes, then it is convenient that you grab the instrument which is called "alberit", for this has a form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Et perceive donques la conjunctive soulement, 
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	The head of the shoulder comes, which means you need to release the oil before the seventh day, and take care of the abscess that is causing it; and when it is appeased, then release the eye and put on its face a poultice for one day, and be laid in that dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then this patient comes, a little by little, and becomes accustomed to its case; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Land of Arabia, who told us that in some other country they used to do an operation with a lancet, by which they would draw out the water, but I never saw it or knew of it in our land, nor did I read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And this is what it looks like when they do not know the forms of alum, because those who do not know them see them as such; and they are from pure arsenic:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the head of this same subtlety is in three angled wounds.
de la char sor le neis	of charcoal on the skin.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	There is no time when charcoal is not joined with other different things, because there are some that resemble scorpions to the point of being like pieces; and those with charcoal added in various colors, and those with soft charcoal like bone-colored charcoal.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Therefore, in those soft chars that are not reinforced, it is necessary to place the patient between your hands against the sun; open their nostrils, and pour the vinegar on those chars, and apply hot coals; for as long as you can sustain it until spatumile (subtle knife), then take out whatever you can.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	In case the remains of anything cannot be covered, if you put all the instruments in order and lightly, they do not stay; and if they are not covered by any sort, or by an abscess, or by cauterizing, as is suitable, then cut as soon as possible, without delay. If it is a malignant abscess, hasten and cauterize so that they do not fall until the bone is dried out and all the flesh is torn apart, and either let or send to one who knows how to heal, hot water or vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the poultice is not applied and moistures come just in front of the palace, if it is considered healthy; and if moistures penetrate deeply as they should, consider that there is no bone exposed beneath, because the instruments do not come to cut. Therefore, it is fitting to put a fil of linen a little thick, soiled by hands, and with some powder on either side, and apply the patient's head into its poultice at some power, and smell it until it comes out from the poultice in front of the mouth; and this is a light thing for him who wants to do it; then hold the chief that comes from the poultice with one hand, and the other chief that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and check them one by one as we are sitting around the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Instruct the one who knows how to cut the hair so that he learns that nothing has corrupted that flesh, then take his son, clean the wound, and anoint him with Egyptian oil, and put it directly over the bone as before; do this three days or more, until the ointment corrupts all that remains of flesh; and then place a linen cloth on his head for some days until he is healed, and if he needs dried medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, because it distills oils and medicines into the linen.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or lead, shaped like a lampover, like a cloth, and conduct them in the same way; if you see this, make one closed and sewn, with instruments prepared for purging the head; and hold one hand on top of the head to hold it while you heat the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh on the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often it appears in the head of the neck a disease called "telul", and grows and becomes large boils, so visible to sight; and for that reason you must make a poultice at the beginning, and burn the bone all out, then apply hot cautery or medicine; and if one delays until they are big, if it is hard, of red color, of bitter taste: do not touch it with iron because it's an enchanted abscess, for when one cuts once, there comes great evil to the patient; and if the abscess is soft in touch, not of bitter taste, but you see how much can be covered, then make the patient empty himself and watch the poultice with fear, and treat him from dry things and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When they strike with a needle and skin
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	He sees that when the solution of continuity comes from one of these cartilaginous joints, he profits little, for it is not true in many men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to look at this carefully if the wound is fresh and full of blood; and then add the two lips to a suture, then treat the patient until he is healed; and if the lips are torn on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scar all the parts of their flesh until they heal, then reassemble the two lips to a suture, and tie it up, and powder with powdered antimony and incense broken, and apply it on top of the powder piece of emplastrum of strong or another plastering material, and let it sit on him for some time, then treat with ointment until he heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of sewing is that you assemble the suture: or with needles, as we have said in the suturing around the belly; or with thread, as I told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips.
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	With your hands inside the lips there is an abscess, like grains of sand, and smaller and larger ones; therefore you must turn the lips, and split each one open, and take out with forceps and cut into each part; then apply vitriol to the incision until it stops bleeding; and then wash with vinegar, and cure the wound with dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the gums.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the gum gets swollen because of an itch, which they call "albulus"; if you must, use tweezers and cut at its root, and let the blood flow out or draw it up; then apply vitriol to the incision, or other powders restraining and drying; and if that swelling returns after the second cutting and cauterizing, and many times does so, if you don't cauterize again, and this is how one treats oozes.
des sordens	of the ears
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	There is no instance assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, with rough and painful scales; and sometimes there are black and yellowish teeth and pus, until corruption comes to the gum, and they become infected; if you must treat him so that he sits on your lap, and his hairs remain in your hand, and remove the teeth or the scales when they appear, not leaving anything behind; and do as I have shown for blackness and greenish color, and yellow and other blemishes, until they are cleaned up; and if it is found at the first attempt to take out a tooth, that's good; but if not, then reattempt the second day and the third day, until you have treated all of them; and know that teeth need various shapes of tools for removal according to what the work shows, because the ones who file on the teeth outside have other forms than those who file between the teeth; and these forms and others should be stored with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay the application as long as you can, because it should not be done like this; for it is a very high substance therefore we have no excuse to do the wrong thing.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to treat the tooth, it is necessary that you be certain about the shape of the tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain of the patient is that of a tooth, and suppose it is good, then treat the healthy tooth; and be careful not to depart from the pain by this means, as much as you can, until the evil causes leave, because we have never wanted to do this for these physicians; and when you are certain about the shape of the tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the inside of the tooth with a sharp instrument very hard to ward off the gum disease from all parts; then grind it down with your two teeth or with fine tongs until they are thoroughly cleaned, and then firmly grip the jaws; and put the teeth of the patient between your own cheeks, and hold them well so that they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth directly towards breaking, and if it does not leap forward, take any of these instruments and put them inside each part lightly, and move him as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the teeth are perceived and muddled, it is fitting that you fill them with cloths, in or on the places where they are broken; and if you tightly bind him with a subtle grip, so he does not break when binding; and it is very careful to put some oil over the gum for softening the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be cautious that you do not break it, and allow a part to remain, and reveal to the patient by the evil of the root even greater pains from the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Be cautious that you do not do this as the ignorant master does, who by their haste and boldness break the cartilage every time, and do not bring to them anything but what we have told; but sometimes they come upon it by the vomiting of great disease through the roots that remain, or by breaking the cartilage, just as often happens; and when the tooth is worn down, wash the mouth with wine or apple cider and salt; and if bleeding comes, which often happens, apply a poultice of vitriol to break it; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the fistulas are when they have long pointed ends and large nodes, that they do not swell more when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And are large limbs if they do not swell when pulled out, and are iron made well, and are toothed to hold.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains when pulled out, if it is advisable to put on the limb cotton moistened in butter once a day or twice.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	Until the limb is softened, because with tongs that are called "algefry", the chisel seems like a beak of the knife; and they should be made just as sharp as a file and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	If the roots do not want to come out from all these ties, it is wise that you uncover the whole flesh around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which means the hook, for this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it is good and strong even if it does not break at all, and if the root bursts forth because of this, that is good; but if not, then you will have to help with all the instruments, for then the forms come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help it with this instrument that has two edges, for this is its form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front of the root of the teeth, and this instrument which resembles great pincers, for this is its form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	Instruct the patient to hold the instruments with care so that they cannot break; and know that many of the bones are delicate; and also other instruments that should not be known; and the wise masters will test their own instrument according to what their work and the disease show, for there are certain diseases in which the ancient ones do not teach any instruments due to the diversity of these things and lest it breaks or injures another bone, so seek the instruments that you need, which I have told you, and help with gestures, because this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Let the instruments be large and well-fitting to hold the bone securely without harming it, but so that they can also remove it; and then restore him with the medicines suitable for this person, and if there is rot in the bone, even if it is small, so that he has all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear to be different from their natural form and the shape is ugly, and also in young women, so you should know that if the teeth are not born after the tooth, it is not in its rightful place, and one cannot soothe or bind them: therefore cut the root; and if there is an eruption with the tooth, take this instrument of which we have the form, resembling the small beak, and it is of good iron, finely wrought in some.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth is cut with a small instrument every few days due to its hardness, and so that you do not disturb other teeth; if it seems possible to bind it, take one part of the binding material as is shown here.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also as the binding material that we make needles; and cutting with a small instrument gently every few days until the tooth comes loose; then smooth out the surface at the end with a file, so that if the teeth are too sharp they bite the tongue, you must bind the roughness so that it becomes even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth are loose, whether by percussion or by falling out, and the patient cannot bite firmly because they ache, then you should cure them with medicines that restrain, but these do not work; if they must be restrained with a thread of gold, for the threads of silver become green and rot, while gold does not move at all; so when choosing the thread, neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you observe that the teeth are coming loose, then take the thread and tie it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the stitches between the healthy teeth, as there are one or more, until you stop biting firmly at the sound of a healthy tooth on the other side; then resume covering where you started, and gently tighten your hand, so that it does not move at all; and be careful to tie close to the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Instruct the patient to take hold of the head of the shoulder with tongs, and assemble it, and put it between the healthy teeth, and place it so that it does not harm the tongue; and then let it be tightened as much as possible for as long as it can stay in place, and if it comes loose, or the thread breaks, strain it with another thread; if it remains and serves thus for its entire life, that is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of both healthy teeth and both molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, fresh as fresh, just like we have said; and do not let anyone intervene who is not learned and experienced, for at no time was the form of a tooth made from the bone of a cow, and the one that has fallen is put back in the place where it is defective, and strained as we have said, and remain and serve thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Cover the tongue's joint
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Never is the joint that comes from below the tongue either natural or acquired at birth, but rather when some accident happens during a wound or from a bite. When treating such cases, work on the patient's mouth and head so that his teeth are in their proper place, and free the tongue; then cut open the nerve of the tongue, as far as the tongue is loosened from its bed, if it has any hard spot or injury, and apply a quick bandage. And make sure the wound is not too deep, lest the artery underneath is harmed; and when you have done this, take the patient to cool waters and a gentle treatment, or cold water, then place on the tongue a linen tie each night, so that the tongue may recover.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	If there is bleeding from the head comes, apply vinegar to the wound; and if it does not come out, cauterize with cautery slowly, which is good for this one; then treat with another treatment until he is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see the pus in color, whether white or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if he leans towards inflammation, and there is moisture, take out the ulcer, and make a small spatumile, and deliver from one side and from the other; and if it does not come out to his wound, apply vinegar so that he may be stained, then return to his wound until you treat all of it; then lift him away with ease and with care, and cure with other treatments until he is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Wounds of the throat.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	There is no occasion for the throat to have boils that are called "godath", and they are simply two amandrés, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, be careful: if it's a hard boil of small size and red color, don't touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also to prevent the bleeding; but let it be until it dies, and then you will remove it, or it would break on its own; and if they are white in color again, and the roots are subtle, you should have prepared an instrument to cover it, but first examine whether the boils are calm and have calmed down.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	So that the patient sits in front of the sun, and his head is straight, and he opens his mouth and the servant presses the tongue between his hands, so that this shape is formed; and it shall be made of either silver or fine gold, just like our scalpel:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Press the tongue on all this instrument and you see the abscess, if you take an onion and a finger and put it into the honeycomb, and pull forth what you can; and pull none of these things out with threads, then cut at the instrument, so that there is this shape which resembles force; and see how the cheek is curved, and one side more than the other, and they are very fine, and it is made of iron or honey:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have that instrument, then cut with tongs, so that there is this shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	Instruct the patient to hold still from one side and the other; and when you have touched one of the nuts, touch the other in the same manner, and after incision gargareze the patient with hot and cold water, and hot and cool, until bleeding occurs, if so gargarize the patient with a juice made from bitter pomegranates, or myrtle flowers, and similar things, until the wound is stopped; then continue the cure until the patient is healed; and when no more apertures occur in the throat beyond the two nuts, touch them like the two nuts are attached.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside the throat, namely the small sinuses; and I had tightly closed the entire throat so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, nor eat or drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like this for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses are so swollen that they have been closed with two stitches through each of the two entrances to the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	Therefore I applied a poultice at once and sewed it in one nostril, then rubbed with fire and took a great portion of the bowels; then sewed another in the other nostril and closed the mouth and pressed the tongue; after sewing an onion in these abscesses and cutting off a part, only a little blood issued; and now, I opened the conductive passages of the throat for her and she began to drink cool water and then wine, and did not cease cutting at this abscess for a long time; and the abscess reopened again, filling the hollow that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore I inserted and cauterized within the throat: thus he remained still increasing; and I departed from these parts, and only God knows what he was after me.
de l’uve	from the wound
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the wound descends and it is pulled up and lengthened, if it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is not large and round, if it is a "wound".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cut as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit from it, and you see that the swelling of the abscess is relieved, and it is subtle, so it is fitting to copy it; and the one that is round and assembled, but not long, this is a bloody or dark-colored wound, so you should close the incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner in which I have said about its shape and length, you should seat the patient in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that we remembered here before; then thrust a needle into the wound, and pull it out slowly, and cut at the two places I mentioned earlier on the incision between the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you do not cover my force more than the excessivity which is outside of the natural term; for if you do it more, it will hurt your voice and tongue; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure until it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of cutting, it is necessary to use an engine at the cautery of the fearful senses.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of cautery is water and dew.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient puts his head on your healthy one, and then presses the tongue against the instrument we have said in the cautery chapter, with vinegar hot cloth, not too thick nor too thin; and using the tip of this instrument, because there is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to place a single hair on top of their head with a spoon, and put the instrument over the hair so that the saliva and mucus run from their mouth into the medicine, until it does not come down to the throat or the tongue; then hold your hand firmly over the medicine and press on the forehead, for half an hour's worth of time, until you see the juice running out and the bites of the medicine are appeased; and if you see, take cotton and put it under any instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and pour the instrument into the cotton channel above, until the cotton sticks to the forehead; do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and fall off after four days or five.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than the cautery or incision; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamine and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and arnica and similar herbs, and assemble all or any of them in one pot, and add easily, and boil; and let the pot be well sealed with strong earth, and with the instrument according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And if of silver or tin, and if one of the nails is poured into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises up through the nose by the incision, until the nose becomes numbed; after this, it is repeated frequently, until the nose dries, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the advent of the abscess cold, for many things happen then, and do not make this more than when the abscess is receding.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	If the fire cautery is not present, take a candle and put it inside his head an arrow of lead, so that the mouth of the patient does not have too much heat; for the arrow of lead does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and this is a good cure together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Sometimes this happens at the throat with a rope or an arrow of fish, or with nothing at all; therefore it is fitting that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun for the entire instrument so that you see if there is anything. What does not appear and returns to the throat, it is fitting that you make the patient vomit so that the meat may be cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing sticks after vomiting, or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of bread, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and tie to the sponge a thread, and then tie it again. When she comes to life, you will pull it out; and if she does not come to life from what we have said, take an instrument for diving in this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Instruct the patient to let the hair on their head grow curved so that it can more easily enter into the throat, and have the head raised upwards; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest they come to life and do not push the bone inside; and make sure that the mallet is wet, for this will prevent it from being rough on the thing, so that when it is forced down, or it is treated with the instrument evenly, until it is completely through.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat cord
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Since it has no effect on the cord of the throat, as I have said in division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not benefit, then examine the neck of the patient towards the sun, so that you press the tongue to the instrument which I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, then if it has all that little one inch cuticle, or have thin nails that are worth those.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	But if it's not worth it, take a small thread of hair, and tie it around the neck of the sick person, then drink or swallow a whole hot iron.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is afflicted with cold water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full vessel of cold water, and cover the mouth, and let it be swallowed with senses moving, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the wound feels the water, spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not spit as we have said, then submerge the sick person in asafoetida, at the instrument that I mentioned for the fumigation of the wound; do this many times, because they will expel with tartar.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Instruct the patient to put a pot over their nose, where there are charcoals or charcoal vis, and cover it with a pierced cover in the middle, so that the keyholes of the instrument stick out; then administer the fumigation, and put the patient's head of the cage into their mouth, and close the mouth so that no smoke escapes, but comes straight up without delay; and now the vapors will take effect, and if they do not come out, repeat the fumigation multiple times; and let the patient suffer from thirst, eat unclean and salty things, and do not drink any water; and thus the disease is treated by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument through which one treats the abscess is thus: when one can see it, resembling curved tongs for nails to enter into the neck; and has the appearance of a spoon's beak, and has roughness like lime, so that what takes it cannot let go.
li chapistres des apostemes	The physicians who cut open abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many are like abscesses, according to what is remembered after each one in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two ways, one of which is similar to the other, because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for those who are within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	because the abscesses of the head are different from those on the trunk, and the abscesses in the thigh bone are different from those that come in joints, each having their own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if not to pierce those that do not need it until the bowel is dead according to its completion; and if of such there are who require piercing when they appear, and do not die as expected, just like abscesses in joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from the joints, and they are left until it is rotten inside, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is in the main limb and if you wait for perforation until it dries up, if it harms the main limb; or if it is near the foundation, if you pierce so that it dries up; and it is not wise to pierce an abscess when it seems like the digestion has completed, because fire will eat away from the foundation, and it will rot further inside, and a fistula will form; and cannot be healed in great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is wise that you know the location of the perforation of the abscess which dries up according to the completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the change in movement and the aggravation of the headache of the abscess, and other signs; and it is wise that you make the perforation sit so near or more dependent from the abscess, where it opens most; and let the perforation be long on the body, and if the abscesses are in hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and all like it, without any purulent discharge.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	When these joints are swollen, according to which member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the groin, if it swells, let the perforation remain until it is confirmed that digestion has been completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce in front of it, the blood will congeal and the body is filled with much filth; and by chance the lips and the fundament will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess you pierce according to the size of the body, according to which part the member has need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is fitting to pierce small abscesses in small wounds; and large abscesses in large wounds, and many cuts according to the similarity of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses as require that you cut the lock of hair, and cover; for when they have become as much as we have shown, and are softened, it is fitting to do so as one makes babies: and if there are those which are split into three angles, and those where one cuts like the juice of myrtle, like abscesses of blood; and if there are those where one does a round cut, and other sizes and shapes, and similar cutting.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, like an abscess that is soft and superficial, it is necessary to lance it straight; and when the abscess is large, and he has collected much pus, and you lance it, so that you don't take out all of the pus in that hour, but only take out one part; then stop the opening next day, then do not touch anything in that direction; do this many times until the bowel is completely emptied; similarly, if the patient is weak in virtue, or a woman carrying a child, or small children, or old men decrepit with age.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	But if you expect to see the issue of the bowel every time with the outcome of the lance, and by chance, the patient dies, do not despair.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then shrink from this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if it issues a wound, and examine whether the wounds of the abscess are small; and if it is an open lancing, then apply linen or old cotton cloths; and if there are large abscesses, and much pus, it is advisable to insert tenths in each one so that they come into contact with each other; and if you have struck at the abscess a part of the hide, and you have turned inside, it is necessary to fill it with old cloth or rasp of fine linen soaked in moisture, and tie it on the third day; then apply plaster and ointment until he is safe.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood has escaped to the right side, apply cool and gentle water, and wet the cloth, and tie it around the place that will heal many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood does not persevere, apply gentle treatment and cure, and the powders that I have in my hands in this book, and if it is winter time, and the place where it was injured is very nervous, you should tie on tourniquets and wet cloths soaked in wine and oil hot; and if it is still, and the place is charred, you should cover it with wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and oil hot, every third day, as we have said; and then remove the wound, clean it up, and cure it, as it seems proper, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is what one must know universally in treating abscesses: or you have said how to go before the treatment of abscesses, and here it is told by the physician.
des soros	of sorrows
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the head wounds come to produce small abscesses, and are like those in cloth, just as the hair of a goat, and there is much similarity.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are also fats and such that are moist like pus; and there are those of flesh which are due to moisture just as worms, and there are others that are hard and stone-like in cutting, and there is no doubt about them if the arteries do not cause opposition.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the wounds of the belly so that you will know all instruments which are called "entromissoire", because the form comes after, what kind it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	If it contains moisture, they do it over long hair.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is empty, they scratch without leaving anything on the skin that contains that moisture, because it comes back again when they leave nothing; then plunge cotton in ointment Egyptian, if present; if not, in water and wool, and apply to the wound, and let it remain until the next day; and those who are left for a night will come.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then reapply the cotton as before, on the second day, and the dressing, until you know it will not stay for a night; then treat the wound with ointment suitable to him, until he is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscesses hold no more fat, he will cut according to this form, on long hair; and you will pick off the sinews, and scratch from all parts, and put all your care of traction behind the cloth where it lies; and if the arteries make against you, do what I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do also of the abscess if it is hard, and with cutting and with curing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the size of the hard abscess is taken and the moisture, if it is lighter, for there are few bloodlets.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if it is so that any of these abscesses or swellings do not have moisture, and I showed you examples of such abscesses as were taken from the head of an old woman; and I found this abscess to be like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break; and if anyone had burned with it, one would have done just as well a wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that come or swellings, whether they come on the head of children and on the roots of the ears, open them if they are all day to the lowest part, in order for the bowels to come out; and treat as it is necessary.
des scrophules	Wounds of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often they form abscesses in the neck, and under the armpits, and sometimes under the skin, and one swells with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly located in its own spot, as with the abscess and swelling of the head, as we have said; and the symptoms of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some swellings that contain moisture, and there are others that are malignant and do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In the one that you see has good flesh around the armpit, and is like the color of the body, and is silent in all parts and is not inflamed near the neck or artery or vein nor deep; so it is fitting to cover it up, and scratch off each part, and let the two lips swell with redness as one would have done on an abscess of the head; and take it off a little by little, and be sure that you do not uncover the nerve or vein, and do not make scratches or cuts too deep, lest your hands fail, and you see too much beforehand, so that you do not cover more than what is necessary.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	Instruct the patient to apply vinegar or an artery if it cannot be closed, so put vitriol in the wound, or any powder that stops blood, and hold the wound tight; and leave it until the abscess is eased and the pain is reduced, and then start to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the swelling is not drained, return to your work until you complete it; then ask your assistant if there are any small scrofulae remaining, cut them and remove them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	If there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, do not cut that scrofula at its root, but rather tie it with a double strong thread, and let it fall loose without any trouble; then apply to the wound linen soaked in Egyptian oil.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you cut the scrofula entirely, it is fitting that you assemble the two lips of the wound and sew them up now, because there will be no more swelling due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If it is fitting that you understand to cover the root of the thing, and treat with force, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have swelling, pierce it or cut through; and treat as we said before, depending on the situation, then apply poultices with ointment and similar things, so that the corruption does not spread from what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, apply ointment to staunch its flow, until it becomes healthy.
de squinance	of squamation.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old people said and spoke about the cauterization of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land do it, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	It is necessary for those who have strangulated that the rupture of the throat, which is called "epiglottis", be avoided; and do not attempt to help them because all the veins and the membranes in the mouth or in the throat or in both are inflamed due to the severe cut in the mouth or in the throat.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the channel of the membrane, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so as not to escape the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four one small incision across, between the two circles or according to the size of the incision across the cartilage; and if we do so, it is very advisable to cut the epiglottis in such a way that there will be no cartilage left, and the vessel is long in reaching.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	Instruct the masters to extend the skin of the neck to the entire length when they are fearful, then split the wound so that it comes to the chenile; and exclude the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then strike the soft part, as we have said; and this will be proven by the section of the falix of the chenile that has sprung forth from the broken limb, and by the failure of the voice; and let the wound close over a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed by which you doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the blood vessel, and remove all the membrane so that the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce ulcers, until they are healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Because of the danger that one will not make this just when the throat is completely stopped, and the patients are judged to be at death's door, and the defect becomes clear.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	The cautery of fire instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I see that a maiden took out her knife and pierced her throat, and cut off some of her breasts; and I was summoned to cure her, and found her dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found out that it was from the blood that had come out of it; and I realized she hadn’t cut herself by vein or by cutting through a nerve, but came out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I rushed and stitched the wound, and cured her until she was well; and it happened to the maiden that she had only become red of voice, and returned after being put back in shape; for this is why I say there should be no fear with cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This is a hernia of the throat called 'hernie de gorge', which is a large swelling in the color of a jay's feathers, and it occurs mostly in women. It is two kinds: natural and accidental; or if it is not due to any engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental is in two ways: for one it resembles a fatty lump, and the other resembles an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it should not be treated with fire alone, but in those who are small, and test and search all around the vicinity. If you find it just like fat, and do not sense any vein, strike as we strike flesh, and take out its head, if it has none; and carefully search thoroughly, and treat it as needed, until it is completely healthy.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to treat us, of which I will speak all the similarities; and it is necessary that I tell all the differences between good and evil.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an issue is then fever and inflammation until the heat has passed, and it has been completed with putrefaction; therefore rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the evil there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the abscess, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the flesh, and begins just as a lump, and grows accordingly as a mass; and are like these similarities, or grime, or moisture, and are much of color like what I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure with no one, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form whether it belongs to a chapter or what follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is that you apply or moisten more than what you find in the abscess, and turn your thumbs little by little, until you see that the instrument has pierced the vein, then, according to the size of the abscess.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the moisture comes out through the cut, whatever color it has, as I have said for other abscesses; and if the instrument does not come out moist afterwards, you know it is fat, so make a cross mark on it, then take hold of it with pincers, and lightly scrape it from each part, and beware the coat where it lies, in order to treat it sound with your nose; and if you cannot treat it sound, then cut it into pieces so that it does not stay there.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it stays in that place, it will come again many times; and if it stays for a little while and doesn't cause any grief, apply the wound with some corrosive powder sharp, and hold tight the wound, and put on soothing things near the abscess, and cure other wounds until it is healed; and if the pain is great, cut off two fingers from the wound, and cure the one who caused the injury to die.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein bursts against you or something else when you rush to it and apply the vinegar of vitriol, cut off two days or three, until the wound has dried, and rest from the bleeding; then return to cover that which it has caused to stay outside.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Now here are the forms of the interstitial discharges, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; and among them there are three quarters called "albaret," and one called "breb"; and they come in three forms: great, medium, and small, to enclose the abscesses of fistulas; and are also like the needles with which you sew the sores, made of citrine thread, iron, or silver; and are yellow, but prove useless for enclosing the black pus of fistulas; and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the size of the fissure.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the cancerous tumors are many in appearance, as you see here: great, medium, and small; and there are tumors with two heads in three manners; and those with three heads, and likewise in three manners; and there are tumors with two heads and only one head, and likewise in three manners; all these are necessary in their own place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these are cut in such a way that they are sharp, and some of them are not cut from both sides, which burns the flesh, because of this one does not cut the vein or the nerve; and those who penetrate are replied with hammers, so that the patient does not lose anything at the opening of the abscesses; and there are three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see; and none should be used more than in the chariot wood, such as legs, arms, and nipples, and joints, and similar uses; and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling scratches on fistulas, according to this shape, with which one stains the blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And put it back at no time on a limb that is healthy with veins cut open, and arteries, at no time will they return to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never do the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they resemble the breasts of a woman; and they remain swollen and inflamed, and whoever wishes to cure them, should follow this form according to these lines from page .b to page .g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scorch the fat, and apply a plaster of medicine mixed with charcoal, then assemble the two lips of the wound to the skin, and treat it until it is healed; and if the nipple swells downwards and is deformed as in women, so that one becomes stuck to the other at the end of both, if they do not separate, because the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from page .b to page .g; then scorch the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary for treatment, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or if the incision is not complete, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the decrease in blood, so that you fill the wound with wet cotton cloth in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it absorbs the remaining fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	The evacuation of blood when incising an abscess, and incision on a bone, and curing wounds, and extracting arrowheads, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The abscesses that come from below the joints are hard swellings or where it has ribs, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture therefore must be cut according to this form, from the line .b. (at) the line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire bow that is in the abscess is empty, apply the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment suitable for those until they are cured.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like swellings similar to scrophules, then cut it in the same way as we have said for cutting scrophules, and if the wound is in a place where blood can be let out, apply fire cautery as we have previously stated.
de la routure de l’artere	When cauterizing with fire
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut and the skin is burned on top of it, if it often leads to abscesses, and similarly also happens with a vein that has fled and an abscess; and if one examines as such when it's for the artery, then the abscesses are long in that part by length; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel strangulation; and when it's for the vein, there is often a swollen appearance; and this is folly to cover up this abscess, and even more so when it's below the joints and angles and around the neck and in many other places, and it causes great swelling.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to shun the cure of iron, and one who has a head should also shun it; and in those with an inflated artery, do it above the skin so long. Then sew around the neck as tightly as possible, and carefully cut open the artery through the skin; then insert an arrow into the vein on the other side, and tie the artery with two strings of twine for 12 fingers; when you see no blood coming out, and the swelling has disappeared, point to the source of the abscess; then apply the cure that is drawn from the bow, until the ties begin to form; and treat this wound according to what is necessary, until it is healed; and if the abscess was due to the size of the vein, you should tie off that part of the skin with your hand where you can remove the abscess entirely, then insert an arrow through the tied-off part, so that it runs from one side to the other; then tie off the abscess as I have told you, or tie a string of two parts around two fingers of the knee; and if you doubt whether the strings will not come loose, you should reinsert another arrow on both sides of the entire abscess through all the cuts made at the first insertion, and bind the strings in 4 fingers; then cut the abscess until it is dry, and then cut off the dried part, then apply a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, and then bind up with bandages, and treat wounds of tenters and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	There are abscesses at the nails.
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, abscesses come to the artery and vein, when the nails are exposed, or because of excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often at the joints and in the toes, where there are bones, and it's a grievous abscess, and its color resembles the color of flesh, and is more prone to cause pain; and when they try to restrain it with force, he feels great pain, but not because of infection of the body, but because of poor hygiene; and it's very painful all over, and doesn't move forward or backward, neither above nor below, and those who have joint issues should not be covered in iron, for by chance they might contract an abscess; and those who are on the head or forehead, make a poultice with the spatumile.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if you have one pair of shears and cut it at its root; and if it is large, if the wound breathes, then scorch it, then scrape off the dead tissue, put the bone back in place, and sew up the wound as best as you can until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of great sores hanging around.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	There is no case of this disease in the belly or any other part of the body, and it is called "fungus" by its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots and large bones; and there are small and great ones; and I saw a man who had two bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, and they did not have any difference, they were white, and they had thin roots, and they were cut open, and decayed due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	Inscribe these and you will find in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI ounces, and the works done through the incision are such that if you look carefully to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist with a subtle root; if it is touched with the spatula large, and be present with the cautery fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in cutting comes many times great hemorrhages of blood, and if you do not wait, then haste with the cauterizer; and if you see the patient is fearful and fearful of the incision on metal, take a thread of plumb well made, and tie the artery as we have said, and let it remain for two days; and then restrain it, and do not cease to strain the thread of plumb until it cuts the artery, and feel by him the work done; and if the roots are large, then fear with cutting myself in the same manner on the belly, but you can cover half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and be careful that you do not cut the joint which is of fiery color and poor sense and of clear sight.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	This is an enchanted abscess, and I came to the cure of this boil after.
quant li boude ist fuer	When a bubo occurs
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the bubo comes from cutting or piercing of an abscess, and is on the belly and there are several swellings, just as it happens in other cases, or when blood is drawn out through veins or arteries according to what is in front, or due to vomiting; and if this is by the route of the syphalics and from the issue of the abscess, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body and is a light thing with pain, and has an open discharge of various kinds.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when you press it with your two fingers, so that it returns again, and sometimes if it is scarred, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and for great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	Et if it's due to moisture, that's a light thing, and open well when you press with your hand, don't constrict;
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is fitting that you leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter of abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is concerning the intestine or the gallbladder, you should instruct the patient to press his groin, and stretch himself straight, then press tight around the bowel; then command him to rest between your hands, then go towards the place where you have marked it to every spot of the body; then cut a quarter of the abscess above all the thick skin; then tie him with a strong thread or a cord of fine silk tightly, and make sure he does not break free from the tie; then open a quarter of the abscess extended on the line, and pour your medicine into it, and seek out the intestine; if you find it caught in the tie, release it, and pour the intestine into the void of the belly; and if you find the gallbladder, take one needle and cut the superfluous quantity; and if the artery causes opposition, or the vein, go carefully towards, then return to your work and take two needles and pour two thick threads, and pour the two needles around what you have made pierced; then strain the abscess in four parts above the needles, and if you see it, release the needles, and leave him as long as he can relax, and cut off his dead flesh according to that which we said; and remove the stain or moisture that you find, then cure the liver of what it requires, and solder the liver.
dou chancre	a chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in division the similarities of a chancre and how one must treat with medicine, and how one should not use iron cure; and we say that chancres come to the mare, and great care is needed for the treatment, and the ancients say that when chancres are on you or can be scratched like a chancre which is in mammary glands, and in the udder, and in similar places, one must remove it all when it starts, and when it grows large and old, one should not approach it because I have never had any success with such; nor has anyone else been healed of chancres before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ulcers, when they are on you or can be removed, as we have said, is that you purify the patient of black bile once; then make him healthy if he has manifest repletion, then do the ulcer; then apply ointments and chancres, and remove the head from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and expect well that he will be in your hands or with any thing; but if they bleed from the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize so that the wound is not touched again; then cure him with another cure until he is healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	For we have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done by medicines, and the one that is cured with iron: if it is only opened; and you should not touch iron in these two similarities: this means tympanites and yposarche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when treating the medicine for dropsy called "eclites" that does not profit, look at whether the patient is weak, or if they have another disease than dropsy, like constipation and solution of the belly and similar things; do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient very weak, and they only have dropsy and are neither too young nor too old, you must then act: lift the patient straight up with your hands, and the ministers press the abdomen towards the lowest part of the belly, then take the spatumile with thorns according to this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let him be cut with fire.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let him be pricked with a needle, and so that it is not too deeply inserted that the blood may come forth just when you push it in, and it will not heal; then examine if the ingoing is stuck against the intestines: if it seems proper to cut on the third part of the skin two fingers below the joint; and if the ingoing is for liver sickness, it should be cut on the left side of the third part of the skin; and if it's for ulcers, it should be cut on the right side; and do not let the patient lie on the wound so that the superfluous stuff does not go to a weak part in him; then pierce all the leather with the instrument, and push it out, and lift your hand over all the space between the leather and the stump just as if you were scraping it to the quantity of one nail or more, then pierce the skin so that the space comes to the level of eight fingers, and this is like drinking water, then lift it up, and pour this instrument with which it has this form.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is like a fine silver chain, and is made of iron or a sharp stick, and has a small gap in that part; and on one side there are III gaps, and II on the other, and I on the other, and the nails are cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision that the writers carve like a feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	The nail at the top is left, so when the instrument comes into contact with water, pull it up now onto the instrument; empty it then, whether a third or two-thirds of its contents, for if you drain more than what is suitable in that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of their spirit caused by the arrow, or they will lose hands, or approach death; but drain according to the quantity of their virtue, and according to what the arrangements of their virtue signify, and their feet; then take up the instrument and hold back the water, for it is held now by the wound that is above the puncture, as I have said, so that you pierce in this way; then resume the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering such a thing, and draw off a small quantity of water; do this on one occasion only, and be careful not to go mad until it does not last much longer but for a little more water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you doubt the patient, and you give them a lot of water, then the cure of burial or salt, and for much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and they drink from a cup; and the cure with drying medicines until they are healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stoppage of the vein
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never are children born without any stoppages in the vein, or if there is a stoppage, it is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If they are careful, so that it is not pierced at all the spinal canal very subtle according to this shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Instruct the patient to put the broken limb in place as best they can, and bind it tightly with cloth, for three days or four, until it wants to urinate. If it will make urine, stop the bleeding and let urine flow, and then release it; but if it does not come out, because the coming urine is hard to pass, do not leave the wound closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	For this of which the limb is broken, if it is treated with a cloth from the pommel, as we have said, if it will spread.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the limb broken in its place are crippled, because none give birth to those who have a broken leg at the upper end of the penis; for they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up; and they cannot defecate because the material cannot come down until it reaches the mares, and this is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient to lie on his back, with his shoulders straight. Then, take hold of the handle and cut as if it were an inch long, so that the broken piece is in its proper place, lest there be much bleeding which often comes; and if there is, then bind the wound tightly, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	From pimples of the penis.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Sometimes cysts come out in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance; and some are malignant and some are not; so you must take them off one by one with great subtlety, cut and lance all of them, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and cure with a powerful unguent until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the skin is malignant, of a putrid color and foul smell, it is fitting that you apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you cut it and if the skin is wet with blood, and has some of it inside the wound and some outside, it is fitting that you remove the part of the skin that is inside first; and when it is sewn up, remove the remaining part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	But when you are curing the whole thing together, make sure to take care of the joint of the cut so that it is not perceived, for if it is neglected, and comes blackness and corruption on the joint, then it is fitting to remove all that which is black and corrupted; then apply a poultice made of honey and flour, made from the pomegranate rind and violets, then continue other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if they come from blood comes, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery is applied in two different positions: this means that if they come from blood and corruption, and the head of the spear is corroded and contracts, then it is necessary to pour or conduct the spear with a plug, and let the patient pass urine; and when the hair grows long over the chief of the spear, which has been present on those who have not been circumcised, or it has occurred for injury or abscess, then necessarily that you burn them with an earring instrument head, until the ties are loosened, and are released from the head of the spear in all parts; and if this is a painful thing to discuss, then it is necessary to burn it on one spatumile near the chief of the spear and the hair.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a hindrance to continued healing like other wounds; all are possible when we perform this work of our own will, and especially in children, since it is necessary that we do it the better and more gentle way, and the most light for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	The ancients did not say that circumcision of their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have wanted the greatest part of the masters and doctors who performed circumcision in their own way, with force, and all with novelty; for they were afraid because it had two sides, and by chance if someone was above and below, they would injure themselves.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	For the recovery of the patient, and when there is double pain, and when they are made clean, it's not certain that the tip of the member is free; and by chance, the splintered iron may escape, and the wound heals, and many times it happens so that they don't need further cleaning and I've wanted to.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Through the cleaning that is done with force on all the tendons of the line I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the force cuts equally well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, the force cuts equally well above as below. But since the thread must be tightly tied around the vein; and if the manner of the first treatment is such that you make the child think it's not being done to tie the thread around the finger only, then do so in all ways possible; after that, put the hand on the verge straight ahead and blow on it with a clean cloth, until the wound is healed. Then clean well the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the new bandage with a double thread, then tie it below the other one; and hold it tightly as second to the pouchet and the doth index, and cut between the two threads, then bind the clean part quickly and lift the head of the verge; then let the wound dry little by little, for it's not yet fully mended; and put powder on top and above the powder, made from rosewater coddled with good oil roses, and boiled moieuf with sugar, and leave it there until the next day, and cure another time until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The two shoulders should be joined and joined tightly, and the shoulder joints should be as large as the elbow is equal.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the cauterization is when the wounds inside the incision are infected; therefore it is necessary to stretch it to one's angle, so that the abscesses will be made, and cut equally; and if you cannot hold to your angle, if you have nails, then cut.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it happens for three days, and the one that is below the vein is swollen, you should let it be so long as the abscesses are made smooth, and skin lightly scraped; then cut as you can move, and keep away from the part of the vein, lest it does no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the shoulder joint of such sudden wounds caused by powder, which we have said or treated with powders, and if it is struck excessively beyond measure, and it goes up, so as not to cause harm; cure then, just as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	When retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	When retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or gallstones, or similar things, which we have said in the division; and if the urine does not flow freely, and you see that it is being retained because there is a stone lodged either above or below the bladder, so as to be healed, then it is advisable that the patient bend his knees; and they are placed with their feet on their back, and extend their belly from the upper part of their back, and restrict the patient as much as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder is constricted to express the stone above, because the urine cannot flow freely; and if it does not come out, just as we have said, then the patient feels great pain, so it is advisable that you administer an extraction from all the instruments called "siringue", which is made like this: it is a silver instrument with a fine and light edge, like a bird's feather; and it has a handle of a palm and a half long, and is fine at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
des maladies de la vessie	Des maalades de la vessie translates to "of urinary diseases".
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorched or bloody urine comes to the bladder, or putrefaction is present, and you see pus distilled waters and medicines, if do all the instruments called "clepsydra", and this is the shape:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and if it has three perforations: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the medicinal herbs because of which the medicine is very effective in soothing the urethra with addition, if we can drain the moisture, and push when necessary; and when you see that your medicines are going into the bladder, put the chief of the conduit into the moisture, and draw from the one that is inside; if you draw the moisture from the conduit, and then forcefully close it again; for now the moistors will enter it, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the shape of the subtle phialter where one phialterizes the bladder:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et est d'argent ou d'archaut, and it is made of silver or wood, and the nails are higher; and below, where the ligatures split; then take a ewer of sheepskin and put in the moisture you see solidifying on the ewer, then tie between the two breasts forming a good double thread, and heat the ewer on fire; then pour the head with clistere into the horn, then strain your hand on the ewer until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the vein; and if you don't have an ewer, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it all around; then put in the strong thread into the holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles the nail, and put inside what you see oil and moisture and water, and tie in the instrument; and do so as you have done with the ewer, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the vein.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between stone frozen in rainwater, and all signs, and in what kind of stone one must work on, and in the vein, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone frozen in the vein is found more often in children, and this is a sign that it burst out of the vein like water out of its subtlety; and it opens an abscess, and grinds the patient's penis, and he pricks it many times, and then becomes inflamed; and to a great extent, these bursts cause damage; and it is light in children until they are IV years old, and is much painful in elderly people, and is like acne, in those who are between adolescence and old age; and the cure is lighter for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is fitting first to purify the patient with an instrument for cleansing, in order to draw out all the filth that is inside the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it is impossible to cut at any time into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and bend down and move it downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not go once up again to him; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and let his legs be below his knees, so that the bladder is entirely inclined towards the cistern; then seek and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, now hasten to cut it on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out in the toucher all at once to the full, then moisten your right index finger with oil from the left hand of the patient, whether he is sick or not; and pour it into his fundament, and seek the stone; and when you feel it on your finger, if it is in the lower part of the bladder; then press against it, and pour out to the place where you see cutting.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands him to stretch out with his right hand the nails in the upper part, and with his left hand take off the skin that is under the nails in the place where one makes the operation; then he pours the spatumile, for it is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they make what is between the nails and the foundation not in the middle but on the side of the left knee; and it should be straight above the stone, and the two sides should meet with the foundation, and it should be like a door cut through if necessary, wide enough to accommodate the width of the stone, not too large; by chance the pressure may cause one of the two bones that is on the foundation to break off during work; and know that there is part of the stone where there are angles, and margins: if it has been broken out; and if there is part which is below, like a glint, and rounded, from which comes an easy extraction.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, so she should sew, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	But two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out after a long time because the limbs cannot be sewn; but always try to treat it, or cut with shears, until you cut it by pieces; and when you complete your work, apply the wound of frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood and tie it up, and put on top of it a moist cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water to calm the swollen abscess; then revive the patient above his neck, and do not untie the bandage until four days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie him, so he rises much better with oil and water, then treat him with defenison and basilicon oil until he is fully recovered.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, and wounds caused by pus and corrosion, and freezing of blood in the bladder, and if it causes retention of urine, which is known in this way that without its flow with urine: then put dough into the wound, and extract the pus, because if it remains there, the bladder will rot; then lift the wound from water and oil and linen, and help him in all ways as you know, until he is healthy; and it is fitting that all the remedies that you cure for him, you tie the two legs together, and assemble the medicines on his body.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the stone is small and it is stuck in the urethra, and cannot come out: then if anyone of those who I mentioned before tells you to cut your own tail off repeatedly, so that you are excused from cutting through this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have thus proved it this way.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Before I cut the iron according to this shape and fix them at three angles on one stone:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and tie it around the fork of the stone, so that it cannot come back in the bladder; then gently push the iron through the fork until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron on the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; when it comes to do so, press your hand upon whatever is left of the stone within the fork.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it breaks at once and comes out with the urine, and the patient is healed; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents you, tie the thread around both ends of the stone then, make the fork straight towards the stone between the two ties, then pull it out, and release the tie, and cleanse the wound by congelation which is in the wound; and cure as long as he is healed.
de la piere des femmes	Of the stones of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that stone is present in women, and if it occurs once, the cure is painful, and it is forbidden for three reasons: one is that by chance the woman may be a virgin; and the second is that no woman skilled enough can find out where the stones are located, especially when she is in her cast.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third reason is that by chance one cannot find a woman skilled enough in this art with hands; and the fourth reason is that the stone of a woman is more deeply embedded than the stone of a man, because it must be done with greater depth, and great fear there is. If necessity demands it, then it is advisable to take a mirror from a skilled woman, and to examine her carefully, and if you do not find one, seek out a subtle mirror; and bring before him a tale well-known in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and he commands her to perform what you command of the inquiry into the stone; and look very carefully whether the woman is virgin: then it is advisable to strike her root or foundation, and seek out the stone.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	She finds it, so it is advisable to move it gradually from the entry of the bladder up to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then strike above the stone at the root of the thigh in opposition to the midpoint on either side where it is moved and feels the stone in that part; and do not move your hand over the stone or under it, and tie a string to the first small one; then drink ale in the string, if you feel the stone as far as the wound so much that the stone can come out through, and know that there are many kinds of stones: this means, little and big and rough and smooth, long and round and those with sharp edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the likenesses to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if they do not warn you, apply vitriol to the wound, and hold it for an hour until the blood is stopped; then return to your work, as long as the stone has come out, and have the materials I told you about in extracting stones from men to help you in your work. And if they do not warn you, and it's of the artery that was cut, apply powder on the wound and a poultice made of tents and bandages, and do not resume this treatment again, for fear that the patient will die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the wound is cooled and the pus is drained, so that the place may heal.
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rime of water is nothing but a confluence of moisture or white pus, which lies beneath the skin, beneath the cord; and it's called "syfac", and there's never anything else in the membrane of the egg, if one considers it to be another than that; and it's the hide of the cord between the white syfac that we've said; and these things happen when it doesn't happen.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this rime is weak that comes from the joints, and it spreads out that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it's a decline in yellow, or without red, or black, or white, and it happens more; and these are signs to know that there is an assembly, because if it is white syfac, as we've said, then there are abscesses again, like the figure of an egg, and they don't open the joints, for there's moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture on the skin, so that the abscesses form with a part of the flesh, and for this reason people think it's another wound; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joint and the white flesh, so that one can feel pain well; therefore when you see that there is knowledge about the color of the moisture, examine all the surrounding area, because the shape may be before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	So it is decided by those who come after the surrounding area.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we cut with iron, it is decided that the patient should be healed according to our skill and the replenishment of his body; then let him lie on his back, on one piece slightly higher than another, and cover him with a large amount of cloths; then let him lie on his left side, and command the servant to lie on his right side, and extend the rod towards one of the two shoulders of the joint; then take the spooned medicine clean, and cut the skin of the joint from its length until the white flesh, and make a straight incision in the direction of the skin from the shoulder towards the sac; and scrape subtilly according to our skill; then pierce the plain white with water to one large puncture, and extract all the water, and then put on ointments, and stretch the white up; and do not touch the joint's skin, but only the flesh; cut it all in pieces equally, so that if you do not cut it well, he will return to bleeding; and if the blood flows from your hand onto his body, then remove him to his bed when you have completed the work on the white flesh; then assemble the two joints of the skin's shoulders into one joint, and cure as with other wounds, until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you find the corrupted vein of another disease, it is fitting that you bind those vessels that are suspended in doubt about the worsening of blood; then strike the point at all the suspended area, and extract the vein, and treat as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the ulcer is assembled into two parts in one assembly, knowing that these are two branches; then strike the other part as you have done the first equally, then squeeze out the blood, and lay a moist linen cloth in oil rose; and put aside another moist linen cloth in wine and oil, and place on both points, and cover with doubled drapery, and tie above all the ligature that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take the two drapery, and employ fluffed wool according to this resemblance and assemble them by stitching in the girdle of braies, and one of the knees pricked on the foundation just up to the back, and the other to the part of the finger; and the other of the two branches above the two angles, and be all assembled the restreinture in the buckle of the braier; and at no time is this medicine treated with cautery in place of iron for its size, and it is that you take a fine cautery needle, and strike the skin around the points, and heat as we have said, so that the white syrup which contains the ulcer is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the syrup with needles, and scrape off with this subtle cautery hot:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	Instruct the patient to treat it in all ways you can, as long as you are searching; and keep away from fire; and know that this work is more safe; and guard well of bleeding and wounds of infection; and watch out for swellings of abscess or other wound infections; and if no thing makes against you, cure what makes against you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and will not wait for this operation due to its horror, make a perforation as I told you, and it is that when you are certain by the significations we have said that an arseous discharge occurs, then set the patient on the raised seat; perform the incision in the under part with all the width of the abdomen large, and put the perforation deep into the long body; and make the purulent wounds large enough so that all the fluid runs out; then place a cloth over the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining fluid run out; then cure until the wound is healed; and if the scab does not allow the fluid to come out of the mouth of the wound, it is necessary to put in a pen or the instrument with which we treat the dropical fever, because its form is as before; and expand the wound wide, and know that the fluid returns, and is assembled after six months or within eight, and when it is assembled as before, and thus will pass the patient's days.
de l’aposteme des coions	From the abscess of joints
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	It is known that in the division of this branch there are many deaths, so it seems to me that it should not be done; and I will tell you about the work and the similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come out of the body and into the joints; and this is true in most cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to say that this comes from superfluous acidity and water that spreads in the joints, or by percussion; and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no pain, but an abscess that causes grief; and sometimes there are grievous and piercing abscesses with a foul color, and at some times it comes from nowhere, from an artery, or from inflammation in the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it's through no artery, if it is known by the shape of the apothecary joint, when you press with your two fingers; and it does not happen that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is swollen from vein is known by its shape at gentle touch of the fingers, and can be easily done the size above this appearance, and on other swellings; and you should cut the nearest point, then lift with the heel upwards, and release the suspension in all parts of the heel.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the heel is already swollen with these swellings, then it is necessary that you treat the heel, and cut it; and if there are aunts in the sole, or in what is inside the shoes, then it is necessary to release all that space, and make a round cut.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is at your backside, so it is fitting that you copy it all over and extract the pus, just as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are completed, apply the wound of soft wool in oil rose and in wine, then treat other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the joints.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess that is swollen from an enveloping swelling like a boil, with the softening of joints, and the patients suffer greatly when they are dying; and the treatment for this disease is very similar to what was before, and we will tell you about the work of it, as the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	Instruct the patient to sit on the elevated bed, then lower the suspension rope over the wrists, and all the surrounding vessels, and stretch the master's hands; and strike with a spatula, cutting wide through the joint, until they are discovered, and then scorch from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples; then poke an needle or where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein appears, and tie it directly to the other cheek; then strike straight ahead, according to the length of the body, and take away the corrupted moistures; then cure the wound as with the others, so that not even one vessel swells, if you care for all the vessels; because by this there comes no harm, and if they come swollen in all directions, tie the vessels back to their original place.
de la routure dou syfac	The operation of cutting with a sword.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The symptoms of this wound from a cut with a sword are by section or where the cut comes to the flesh, or when extending on the belly in the area of the liver, because the intestines come down from that wound to one of the sides; and these two kinds of wounds happen for many reasons: either through impact, or through jumping, or through fire, or through lifting a painful thing, and by similar things; and signs appear when there is an extension of the cut, which happens gradually, over a long time, without suddenly coming; and there are pus equal in both directions up to the root, because the cut presses against the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it is a cut with a sword that brings sudden pain from its beginning, and are various appearances of pus under the skin, because of the intestine's release and the body's reaction to the cut.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never to the bowels with the intestine, and it is retained in the stomach, and causes great suffering for the patient, especially when it presses.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments with fear, because that's why they are avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And so there are two ways to treat the work of iron. First, instruct the patient to ram in the intestine into the wound if it can be inserted; then tie your hands together and lift the knees. Next, make a cut on top, then cut all the skin around the joints long; then pour in wine according to what you have need to open the wound, so that blood can come out easily; then scrape off the flesh that is under the skin of the joints, until the white flesh is exposed from every part. Then put your right index finger into the joint where the skin is, and make the white flesh go up to your left hand, and lift the joint towards the belly; and command the minister to extend the joint upwards, and release what is behind the binding; and ask if there is any intestine or white flesh hard found, and if you do not find anything, then pour it into the belly below. Then take a needle with 3 large threads of linen woven together, and insert it in the back part of the flesh, which is after the skin of the joints; next to the belly, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are 4 threads; then assemble them one on top of the other like a cross, and tie the flesh with a strong knot of 2 parts; then wrap the threads around the limbs so that no servant who eats your food can enter in you, that no abscess comes in; and put the first two knots close to each other as long as those do, and after them leave a strip of skin over the joint large like a thumb. Then cut on the part below the skin of the joints, until without flesh or bowels, as we have said before; then put linen moistened with oil into wounds, and tie it, as we said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes you must cauterize the white flesh that we have said after cutting, by doubt of the progression of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and let the binding remain until it falls off from him; and if it lingers at the stool, so that it is swollen with hot water, and puts on what we have said, until it comes off; then cure the wound with another cure, until he is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a caruncle (or possibly "hernia" in modern medical terminology, but more likely referring to a small growth or polyp)
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I have never found anyone who dared do the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done in the manner of the branch that joins the eye, in such a way that you tie the bands after cutting them slightly above and below; then cut into it, and cure the abscess where it works, until the bands come out; and cure it as we have said, until he is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you strike the hair, if it muffles and heals the wound, as long as it is clean.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The incision is constricted and has no appearance in the wound, and the cautery is moistened in this place, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin at the joints.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	This happens many times in people, because the bones inside are softened and it's clear to see; and it is necessary, when you want to cure him, that you make the patient lie on his back, and strike the skin which is soft above the natural skin; then assemble the two lips onto a suture, and so far as seen, cut through three sutures or four firmly; then strike between the sutures, and treat the cure as other wounds, until he is healed, and then tie the thread.
dou chastrement	the cauterization of fire
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	I know the cauterization is mentioned in our law, and it pleases me not to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that I will be able to answer questions when someone asks us, and also know the cure; and the other, because we have often had need of cauterization on certain beasts in order to help ourselves, just like a cow and a sheep and a goat and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that cauterization is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one we do by attraction, we sit the patient in hot water until the veins are softened and relaxed; then we pull them with your hand, until they stop bleeding and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: it is necessary to mark well, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspension rope, and strike upon each one after you have well scarred them; and leave a small space from the scarring and the subtle scarring that is on the straps; and this manner of chastement is more enduring than that which is done by attraction, because at attraction some thing may remain from the skin, for that reason the best desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphroditic men (or those born with both male and female characteristics).
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	An hermaphroditic person is according to two manners of houses: one is that between the two testicles open like the figure of a woman's nature, or he has hair, and sometimes in court his urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is also so for women, just like a stick and two fingers.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cures for the dropsy and fever are that you copy the closed characters all, and treat as other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine shoots out through the skin of their fingers, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the toothache
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Toothache is a closed character on the natural part, so long as it is very ugly to see; and some women have it just as much as with one hand, and that's the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary to paint the overgrowth of the toothache on your hand or on one finger, and copy it lightly; and do not apply too much force, lest blood comes out, then the cure with another cure until it heals; and there's another character that forms a lump in the mouth of the marrow, and joint, and sometimes it bursts, and is called by the old "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you wish to copy it, as we have said, the treatment, and the care until she is healthy.
de erratique	of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the nature of woman is not perceived, or her fault is sought; and it is born by nature, or occurs through accident caused by illness that comes upon her; or it is done by chance, or by subtle syphilis or spasm, and has been made deep in the uterus, or on the chest, or belly, or wherever it may be; and the conception is hindered, and the childbirth, and perhaps the flowers do not have; and knowledge of this is through the watchfulness of the bile.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If there are signs of miscarriage appearing, you should choose either to do it with your two hands or by right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is swollen subtil, and he is close to the two pounds, if you hasten, then do thus: put your two fingers together, and let the woman be above on his back, spread out her legs; then make the two pounds form, until the subtle swelled is reduced, and there are no more stoppages; then take lard, and apply it in oil, and place it upon the wound, and have the woman stay at home each day, so that he cannot solder.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the swelled is hard and thick, so it is fitting that you make a copy of it with a spatula resembling leaves of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stoppage is of charcoal, then make a poultice with onions and apply it; and mix your medicines in stitches of blood, as if it were acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together eight times; then bring a large cauldron of poncey water, so that the wound cannot be sutured; and thus do long and let them bring a linen tent dry; and cure with other cures until he is sane.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a swollen limb comes back into shape, it is advisable to cover according to this manner, unless it has an abscess in enchantment.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the swelling that is in the abscess does not need to be touched with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that do not have a usual covering, and when old hemorrhoids form ulcers; and we have said in the division the signs similar to awls, and I will say here which receive healing.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that hemorrhoids and ulcers, when they are formed in the swelling, and do not appear to the touch, unless it is treated with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the throat can be felt, those who can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then let her sit on an altar with nails, and strike at its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, as if it were dragon's bane and incense, and similar things; then pour water into her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and when the bleeding comes, if she sits down in a decoction of sumac and wormwood and gentian and similar things, and then takes barley flour and confuses with honey and easy, and makes it into poultices on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If it happens not, then if you make the patient inhale hot air on his back and rub his mammary glands with a sharp object; then take him, and apply a poultice made from plantain juice or aloe vera juice with wine vinegar, and let him inhale.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, so cure the patient with poultice until he is healed; and if the one called "albathir" appears, which resembles a hardened head, they must cover it as I have said; and then cure him until he is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of the marrow.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come from the marrow, such as canker and rocky abscesses and herpes and itching skin and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in this division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary that I tell you in this treatise the abscess which comes in the marrow, which is not an abscess like a boil; and if you see how to work with fire, look at whether the abscesses are swollen in its beginning when it arrives, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And therefore do not pierce quickly, but make the patient sleep until the pain is calmed; and then put the patient on two stools, or let him recline between two stools, and support his back and assemble his feet near the leg; and spread his knees wide, and place his hands under his shoulders, and tie them well with a good cord; then take the instrument of the abscess to the right side, and attach it as before comes the form; it is necessary that when you see attach this instrument, you put the first part in for depth to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters through the instrument does not go beyond what it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with linen cloth, so that the instrument does not grieve the patient; and it is necessary to put the horn of the instrument on top, and tighten the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is closed in the marrow, it is fitting that you should avoid using iron cauterization, but treat it as we have said when dividing.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Firstly, the art of childbirth is to know the shape of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see a woman rush in labor, and desire to push with force: thus hasten the child to come forth quickly; for when you see these signs, it is fitting to press gently on her belly so that the child comes out soon; because when it pushes up its head, the second one comes with it, and the marrow of its superfluities is cleansed by good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For there are times when it comes to his feet, and it comes upon his chest, or belly, or somewhere else, and he is converted by chance on his neck, and with other bad shapes; so it is necessary for the healer that they be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how one should help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the fever comes on his head by natural cause, and the pregnant woman cries out in pain, and her virtues are weak, then if you make him sit on a stool, or the women hold him; and if his nature is oil or fenugreek, it should be cooked, and then pour the bile between his two fingers with the small spatula whose shape is as described:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the sinew, and strike one of his angles so that the moistures which are in fire drive away; and take the woman's belly so that the fever descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clusterize the woman with muskillaige fenugreek with olive oil; then make her drink and vomit with condision, and hold his mouth and nose for an hour: now if the fever comes.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out of place, it is to be gently reset little by little; and if they cannot enter again, put the woman on the seat, and lift up the feet; then break down the seat upon the earth, and take care that she does not trip on the breaking; and if the hands cannot enter again, and the child dies, cut off the hands with the knife which was placed beforehand, and extract the child, and reset them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child on its feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes upon its feet, it is to be pushed up high; and then turn it little by little, until they are even; and then take hold of the feet and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it cannot stand just as soon as cut, the command instructs to take it and turn it head downwards, and let it fall; if it falls, God will save it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, so the wound heals little by little, until it is in its natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easily done.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come as we have said, so take muskilage of aloes, and oil of sages, and gum of myrrh, and grind all in a mortar; and apply this ointment to the nature of a woman within, and avoid this ointment, then put her sitting in water until below the shoulders; and when she is moistened below, bind with iron, and let go now, for she will fall down now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the outcome of the child upon its genito-incontinence
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, so it mends its nails little by little; then make sure the hair is on his head, and let the feet hang down, and sit him down over I lit; and bend his hands a little and a little, and then put them up to the air; and press the joints underneath, until he is made ready again; and if the child does not jump, so take his feet and make it move smoothly, then lift the belly upwards, then pour water into the hands; and give the child little by little; and instruct the woman to keep him that way until the child gets well.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the child who comes out wide with one hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I will try to engineer to bring back the hand: if you cannot bring it back, so make the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, so make her lie on I lit, and straighten out the legs; then apply the medicine that I have told you about; and if she does not give birth, so make her sit on I siege, then study to bring back the hand; and give the child according to its natural figure, and let it be fed, and instruct the woman to keep him until he gets well.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	The child's outcome after being born with a mark on its neck, and having spread out its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I know that if the patient pulls at its hand a little, then it slowly turns and bends, and comes slightly lighter; and when it is even, you put on the mustard oil and olive oil, as we have said, then he commands that she moves a little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on the stool, and command that she binds herself; and let her be restrained.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner to all the patients
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it happens in this way to all the patients, cut off the cord at the ankle, until the moisture is drained out; and if the child cries on its face and neck, cut the cord from the base, so that it is not retained, and the child will die; then pour the child into a vessel, as much as you have done, so that it may be right, and command to the woman that she binds herself once: for this is done lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Those who are twins often come, and sometimes they do not come at all, or if it is a girl, three times or four times, but this is no strange thing, and it rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things and do not live if they are named; I know that they are multiplied, and are cut off by the womb's sac which is linked to the blood; and sometimes they come out as naturally as everyone else comes out, just like we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out severely, then the treatment is as we have said, and it is with subtle balance, and fast and lightly what she does; and thus as one must lose blood to save.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never are formed in the form of I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than fifteen, and all are shaped like an infant according to the measurement of their gall bladder’s size, for perhaps such a thing has happened; therefore do as seems proper.
de l’enfant mort	Of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child or womb, as I said in division, and she does not come to fire, and you are constrained by the work of hands; if it seems proper that you know whether the woman has a good or healthy condition, or if she had an accident or is afraid of death; if it seems proper that the woman be put on her back, and that her limbs be inclined downward, and raised legs; and the minister applies to her breast, two parts, or binds her to bed if she is not treated with the descent of the child; then rubs the mouth of the womb with moist oil, mixed with musk of altee and fenugreek seeds, and linseed, then takes hold of the doctor's hands with these oils and those musk ingredients; then pours it into the womb lightly, then chooses one or more onions which are suitable for this, and be careful if the child appears to come down on its head; if you stick the onion in its ear, or on its neck, or in its mouth, or on some of the palaces, or under the beard, or near the shoulder, or on its costels, and if it comes out through the feet, then you stick or prick it and at the costel midpoint; and it is proper to tie a small onion to her right hand, and put a pouch between her two hands of the left hand, and pours it into all those limbs which we have said, until it comes to the empty place; and this is the form of the onion:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Instruct the assistant to look for another opening, or where the cut is necessary, so that the extraction be even; and then stretch it evenly in moving from one side and the other, until they come out, and keep the openings closed with teeth, as this is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part of it stays, apply some oil to the affected two of its parts and pour them into that part, and treat the other part; and if it does not stay at all, put this opening higher or higher up, and do thus until it opens entirely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be moved by tightening, you should cover above that curtain, until it opens entirely; then cut at the joint of the foot or the knee, and do thus to the other hand, and make two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the fever is above his feet, then it is a light attraction, and the directions to the mouth of the phlegm are lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if he is bound by wind in the belly or loins, cover it so that you remove it from I draped cloth above the hand; and treat the belly or loins until the moistures which are there come out; and if another member is inflamed and the joint remains, give him a bath of blood poured into the phlegm with his hand, and draw it to the mouth of the phlegm; then pour one or two ounces, and let it flow; and if the mouth of the phlegm is narrowed due to a hot abscess which has come out, do not again rub it, instead allow moist and greasy things; and apply them afterwards, cut in water softening and soothing, and applying them on.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If the child is on its chest, and you can put it level, then follow what we have said about the living child; and if you don't have power, place the limbs apart, and do not leave anything of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if they follow what we have said about the swellings on the joints that come from the marrow; and if bleeding continues, then apply a restraint in water.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whom an infant had died, and she put another on its place, and refused to let the other die.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time, there came an abscess in the throat, and swelled so much that it burst, and caused great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was unable to find any information on a medieval medical treatise written in Old French. Can you provide more context about this text?
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put above an ulcer with great attraction, and from it came a bone, and after some other days, another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised very much, because that particular intestine does not have a bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I searched the wound, and pulled out bones until the woman was in a better state; and she was kept in bed for a long time in such a condition, and soon after came on a boil at the place; and I had record of this chapter only because it seems that when a master surgeon encounters an unusual thing, he knows to seek help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	Bring back the joint to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of pressing, because when you have applied pressure, remove the books; and after that, put back the two joints into their two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Make the cornea more subtle in its restriction, and make it of ebony or boxwood; and make the mouth of the fust broad enough, and the margin of the tree half as wide, and a palm-and-a-half long; and in both ligaments be two similar bindings, which are firm in one and the other, by half a palm or a little more; and these two bindings are bound in the mouth of the cornea to open when you turn both corns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, made in a more subtle and lighter manner, is done from the fust of ebony or boxwood, following the resemblance of the nails; and has two joints with bindings, as you see, one palm long, and two wide; when you open the cornea to all the instrument, place the woman on one side, her hands under and her feet over, then bind the two bindings together in the cornea, holding your hand between the handles, so that you may hold the head of the instrument between its joints; then hold with both your hands as for the nails evenly, according to how much you open the mouth of the cornea, until the stroke is made just what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all mounted above, and it has many similarities; and when the mirrors are prepared for them, they are even more hastening to work, and higher in stature because of their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Unless you have prepared the instrument, do not look at it, for its use is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the third tooth is retained in the child, it is fitting that you command the patient to press their lower jaw with their hand, and then make them spit out the condensation, and restrain your hands to her mouth and nose; and if she falls while doing this, well is it.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that does not work, I take the pulp and make a perforation or hole, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the child, as calming, rue, anis, camomile, cassialigne and centaury; any of these herbs, cooked or boiled in water on fire; then put a spoon or perforated pot into the child's mouth, and the other hole in the back of the throat, and keep them thus until the vapors come out of the child's mouth; then make her spit.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If his second joint happens.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this cure, and is not worse, instruct the barber to moisten her left hand with oil of sesame or with musk and then soak it in water, and then find out the second joint; and when he finds it, grasp it and stretch it little by little straight, so that the marrow does not get stuck during extraction; but they should move lightly at first to the right and then to the left, and then try; if she comes and gets loose.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the marrow of the marrow is tightly closed, we have said to cure by bringing it out and by fumigation with herbs; and if she is not cured by all that we have said, be careful not to go crazy trying; but there are those who say that what is in the marrow should be bound to the thigh of a woman, then wrapped in ointment tetrapharmacosian; if it brings relief and returns, but beware, when she applies herself, if it comes with an evil smell to the stomach and head, and causes the illness.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is therefore fitting, then suitable fumigations are to be used for this: none of the ancients have tried the fumigation with creosote and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument by which you are to fumigate the woman, when holding back the flowers and the second toe if it is that:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is to be seen similar to a cauldron, and put the subtle head in nature, and the hairs long on the fire; and so the fumigation upon the coals, and the itch until it is consumed, and another takes its place.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	For every child is born who has not pierced the foundation, unless one subtle syphilitic is suckled: if it is therefore fitting, then let them pierce that syphilitic in its fundament, and not with a spoon, so that the garment does not touch; then put on a moist linen in wine and oil, and apply treatment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, so tie a rope around the body flat, and let hands rest for days, and be put away when the child gets up to walk in rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes comes a sudden stopping of bleeding from a wound or an abscess; if it is covered quickly, if it heals, just as we have said about tying the body flat.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodules, and those that come from under the foundation before or in the space between the two parts, if there is a fistula or more; and when an old nodulation exists, it causes work, and makes moist skin turn white or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas pass through; and they are caused by egestion or flatulence when the patient makes egestion, and by chance one passes through some way.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that occur just above the bladder, and just above half of the penis; and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and no further from the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And so you will know where the fistula is running to its end, and not to its start: and it is that you put your finger into the bottom of the fistula, and insert a sharp needle made of iron or thread into the fistula until it has some curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has curvature, then you put a thin membrane of parchment or the hair of a horse into it, until you feel the membrane or the hair at your mouth; and if you do not feel it, and there is no passage of blood, no swelling, nor odor, as we have said: seek whether it does not pierce through; for so you must hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is passed beyond the bladder or just beyond the urethra, so that it comes out and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is noticed at the joint of the crotch, then the attempt comes to be done on the left; if there is no curvature and the invention of pain around, then it is that they get stuck in the bowels, and none of these remedies are effective except labor, and vain attempts by foolish doctors who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In those that are not perforated and are not old, there is hope for health by iron, as I have found, so that the patient lies on your hands above his back; and lifts up his legs until they reach his crotch, and bends his knees towards his stomach; then pours a poultice of hay or plonk into it, if it has curvature, until you see where the poultice comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in the joint, then it is advisable to put your thumb index into it, if you sense any movement while applying pressure; and if it is discovered that there is a sequestrum or a chip in your bone, then know that she is painful; but do not work on it unless we cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	But it is not always possible to heal everyone, but this occurs rarely; and the aid that we give, if it is done carefully, as has been said; and put a hot braid into the fistula, until it comes from the bone root; and do this twice or three times, until you know which of these chips must be burned off, which resemble a bird's feather; and then apply the cure of soft bandages wrapped in butter, until those chips are gone, then the cure of splinting and nailing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, this is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this is so, he cannot be healthy in any other way. And if he presses between them, and does not cut exactly at the foundation, and between his tendon and the tenting a thick covering of char or silk, and you see the fistula beneath the thick layer red with heat; if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and pour it away before the tenting, and apply cautery afterwards, as long as the head of the tent comes out, he will be freed from the tent and cured; then he should be given those charred things that resemble an owl's feather, and not remain sick.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if he does not swell up and cuts between you and the work, so that the cautery by fire or medicine is applied.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Car the fire cautery has two things: it is to know that it is the swelling of these charred bones joined together, and the incision of blood and the drying of moisture; then treat the moist tendons in butter or in cold cheese, until they lie flat, and make sure the bones are dry in the wound; then cure the wound of sudden ointments in joints of dry flesh, and those medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is restored, if it is safe and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess comes just to the bottom of the wound and is separated from the body, then put two or more pounds into it and inquire about them.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tendons, and there are two of them or charcoal, or it is close to piercing, if all that has been done is sight by chance and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods: either you cauterize as we have said, or you cut just to the bottom, or if you can, put tentes and cure as I told you; do not go too deep, lest you cover the foundation that holds the wound in place, and come out with the excrescences by chance; then cure, as we have said; by chance, it may be healed, or you will remove that covering which has been over the wound after it has been pierced at its bottom, or by tentes or another instrument appointed; then examine the false char that is in the wound, until you can; then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula away from the part opposite the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this way; and when you put a tent over the fistula, and it sticks to the bottom of the skin above, then take a tent that is perceived at the head according to this shape:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put the twisted thread into II, and put the tent all over the twisted thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the bottom within, then extract the thread from that puncture, as far as you put your hand on the foundation; and take out the head with the thread, and assemble the two joints together, and hold one to the other, and let them be for one or two days; and restrain it at any time, until the threads are worn down these characters that are between two, and closed. Then cure the wound until it is sound and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not heal or is cut open, pierce it in all ways that you can, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not advisable to tie up the wound if it is too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spasm of the spine, from which a fistula is made, is much acute in one part and tense, and on the other not at all, for this reason one should not pierce what one should not pierce, as you see:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: those that are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there may be small or large ones, and sometimes they have a clot attached to them, and there is one or more; but those that are outside the fundament do not have much moisture, and are covered in a thin membrane or some pus, and their color is similar to that of the skin. The cure for these who are inside the fundament is such that you instruct the patient to expectorate in bed until the fundaments stop bleeding, and then the thread becomes visible; if it does not come out, tie the malaide tightly with a tight bandage or cloth, or a piece of chamelot, and pull them off with your two hands, then cut, and powder over with hot powdered ingredients that are suitable for cautery, as said in the chapter on cautery, because the cure of other cures until it heals; if the fundaments cannot come out, tie up tightly, the malaide with a hard tie, to make them bleed, so that it can be seen whether they will come out fully.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is fitting to tie the bandage according to this manner: take one finger thick and put it in a needle, and then pull the thread up above and pierce the needle on the other side, and turn the two joints around the thread below the needle, if they are tight; and then bind the thread firmly, but not too tightly, and pull out the needle, and do so for all of them, and leave one to hold back the flow of blood; then put a soft fabric on top of the wound in oil or rosewater or ceruse, and put it on top, and command the patient to rest; and then let him sleep until he wakes up, and when he is well again, if there are treatments for pain and other treatments, until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	And with a sharpness of thread or fabric around the wound.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	It happens often severely with fever in the intestine, and due to the constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to reset at the point of a splinter or at the angle of an ulcer, which does not leave it moist; then treat until it becomes sound as if it should; and if it cannot become sound, repeat the rasping stronger than before, until it heals, and is scorched; then treat until it is sound.
dou fremit	do not be afraid
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	The bee sting is a small, unneeded appearance in the body, and goes deep into it; and at no time does heat form, and one feels death-like sensation from the tremble, and comes to all the body, and more so to the hands than to other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Instruct the patient to take a thorn from an owl's feather or a hawk's strong feather, and place it on the inflamed spot, until the mark of purple appears all over; then turn your hand around the thorn so that you cover the entire mark, and press the thorn into its root, and make sure its roots are secure.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this of a thorn from iron or stone according to this form, and be subtle below and careful above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce, lest you damage the two, and press them. And if you see, cauterize the mark, as it is before or in front of the fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a cyst.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never is one made to drink from an iron cup or an arrowhead, or melted tin or cauldron; and never are these small and great instruments used, according to what they are meant for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore these instruments are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, which are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cup is small and great if it is used too tightly or if the belly is bound according to this method:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and if there is a defect or the belly is bound, as you see, and the cup is inside perceived; and has one side pierced on each side; and is inserted into one of the sides, and into the other; and put into his belly with medicines in a vessel of best or parchment, and perceived all around by small holes, and between each hole there should be one space, then fill with hot thread, tight and strong as a nail, through X or whichever spot inside, and assemble the belly like a pig; and when the medicine is inside, if it sticks to the instrument in front of a thick thread, then cauterize; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And so the medicine should neither be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with oil or bear grease or similar thing, then pour it in lightly; then grasp the minister's hands together as much as possible until he is fully awake, then pull out the splint, and lift up the sick man's legs to show, and if the medicine comes out as soon as it can; and if he sleeps a whole night, so it will be more aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you splint him in a sickness of descending stomach, and the medicine comes out quickly, he will reappear as soon as he is fully recovered.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if there are hemorrhoids on the fundament or abscess, so that the splint is as subtle as for an infant; and this is the form of the subtle splint where the skin is stretched.
des plaies	Wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	Since we have spoken in the division of wounds about the cure for wounds; or you will say the treatments for hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the place or places where the wounds are made, and why they were made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Things by which wounds are made are caused by falling on stone, and the cutting of a sword and knife, or lance or staff or seat, or similar things; or because they were made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that chokes on the neck, or on the head, or the shoulder, or belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you about each type of wound, and begin with simple wounds on the head, because the remembrance comes in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I dis that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it's due to stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is great, and you doubt lightly of an abscess: then do so immediately to heal the cephalic part itself if it came from blood of the wound, and be healed on the opposite side of the navel; and avoid the patient being replete with wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not heal, if it is weakened by food, and does not drink wine, nor eat flesh: and put on the wound, if an abscess comes out, apply cotton soaked in olive oil only, or rosewater; and if there is no hot abscess, if it is fresh with all its blood, and is moved only by air, powder, then I will tell you a little later; and if he has moved it, apply some ointments until he heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is very large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by stitches, then they must be assembled by suturing, just as I will say for wounds in the abdomen, of the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is uncovered bone and flesh, and it will not hold but for a little bit if you press; then treat the wound with medicine, and cover hard skin in its place with leather, and instruct the patient to eat thick foods, just as eggs and cooked bread, like fowl, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find or leather that is putrid, and it does not stick to the bone, if you press out all the putrescence, and drain off the blood, then treat the wound; and if there is an artery in the wound without a covering, which cannot be stopped with medicine, you must cut through it, and if you find the artery loose, tie it with a thread; and if that does not help, cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	If these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you put on this powder which binds just as much as the art has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is thus: take an equal part of incense; one part of dragon's blood; three parts of vitriol, and mix it finely, apply the wound, and bind it firmly, until it has dried well and joined all its blood; then tie it well, and let it stay loose if it does not swell, for you do not stop the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes only vitriol is used alone, when you don't have the incense or the blood of the dragon, but the art has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the arrow has moved the wound, while it is still in that place, do not put any of this powder on it; but put some ointments prepared or made from chickpeas flour soaked in water and honey until they have set; then the cure should attend to other treatments until he is safe.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	If the break of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, if you carefully pinch the edges; and I will tell you later after this about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck-wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, if there are no differences between this and a fracture of the head; but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	For the shoulders if there is no other solution than to leave the cure and not put anything to restrain it, because the night brings it back and makes it retreat; and do not put on the wound anything that harms, for the substance of the blood is cold, and the continuation of the fever is with the brain, which is in the higher members; but if it's a medicine so, as calomel laved in sweet water, and melted with olive oil, and cured again in sweet water, and other stones from mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, so cut and bind with bandages, then the cure until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and he has a head full of blood, so cut below it; and if an artery is cut, and blood comes in, then seek to remove it, and apply ointment, and cauterize as necessary; and if the spine on his neck is cut, or the throat, and the cord must be guarded, because the flesh goes, so sew the wound above the vein of the neck, and touch only the vein but not the neck itself according to its natural shape; and then bind him at once, and let him rest for a few days, then his cure with ointments dried out until he is healthy; and if the wound has made a depression in the bone, so seek it; and if there are pieces of bone, so burn them all up you can, and what remains do not have, leave as long as the wound gets worse, and is freed and alleviated the discharge; and if the wound is fresh, so powder on top of the powder that I said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has an abscess, then the treatment is as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a lance or sword wound.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it's a stab from a lance or sword and the wound is deep, then look carefully at the wound to see if any movement occurs: for this tells you that the wound is mortal; but if it's not deep, and it's fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it, nor bind it tightly for the wound until it comes out completely from bottom to top, and turn back to heart, and comfort the patient. However, apply soothing ointment, and tie it twice a day; if you don't have ointment, put fine cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; if no spasms come, nor severe pain of heart, nor any straining movements from death occur; and when you see the bones taking their normal disposition, then you will know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wounds of ten and other treatments, until he is cured; and if she cannot be cured, and does not operate, then seek that there is an abscess; so you should do.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple, deep, or on the back, if the treatment of what is in front is applied; if it's large, suture; and if it's small, powder; and if it has been pierced into the bone, and broken pieces have entered, then as needed, remove the splinters if they are exposed; and if not, leave the wound to dry out, because it will relieve the extraction of other wounds; and for other wounds, follow the judgment of other limbs as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	a fall into the stomach
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I will translate the text line by line into English.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	When it is cold, heat him thus: moisten a sponge or half a drapery in water, or heat wine squant and cypress and spike, and remove the inflamed intestine until the swelling subsides; and sometimes do this while the wine restrains, and he becomes muddied to be able to deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestine with water or boil and mash them, because by this means is alleviated the entry of little things; and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound on the instrument by which they are struck, as for the hemorrhoids; and the first cure is that he swells until he shrinks, so that none should cut him unless there be great need and there is not. And this is the means to break them: tear into within the container and do not stop it, and see here the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	When the wound is enlarged, and the intestines burst forth, so that it returns to its natural place in its own proper form, if you have the power, for this is useful.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, it is to be preferred that you put the patient on his back, and lift up his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, it is to put the head and the navel higher than the lower parts, and in this way as soon as possible apply the rule for great and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, do what is fitted out for you; then take between your fingers a soft minister who takes all the gore with his hand, and assemble the lips; and this is the common method of stitches, where you prick an needle or more, according to the size of the wound's largeness, then leave space from the head of the wound two inches, and prick a needle with strong thread; and pierce both sides of the skin with both sides of the needle, which is under the skin, as long as you make it pierced from that side; and assemble both sides of the needle together four times; then tie the thread around the middle of the needle, two parts, and assemble the two sides of the wound together now, and leave space again, and prick another needle; then do so with the same needle, and do not cease until the whole wound is sewn; and it's best to have medium-sized needles, neither too thin nor too thick, because thin ones cut through all the flesh, and too thick ones cannot fit well into the skin: for this reason they should be medium. And it's not good to push the needles too far out of the skin and towards the flesh, so that they do not prick and open the wound before the stitching; then pierce the sides of the needle, which do not annoy the patient at night, and tie or drapes to the sides of the needle to hold fast, and leave them until the wound is sewn; and this method of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because there's a needle with two stitches, and it's common, that you assemble both sides of the skin and the two sides of the gauze together around a needle with strong medium thread; and when you have pierced all four sides, tie the needle to the side where you started, in the way one counts the threads; and put space between each stitch the thickness of an inch. This costure is for men who are seven years old, and I stitched a wound on a man who had a cut on his belly, which was infected by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it was filled with intestines two palms wide, and it was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	The patient had the intestine removed when he was 22 years old, and the wound was closed after 15 days, and treatment, and was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they thought that he was dying, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where no one is found, nor any medicine; but put more cloth above the wound for two times a day, and washed it with water of honey until he was cured.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you two proper ways of suture: take the needle and draw the thread from the side that is before, up to the same distance as the wound; when it penetrates the vein or artery in straight line, then take out the needle on the other side of the body, so that you pierce both sides, just like a peltier makes nails for leather, leaving once the suture thread from one part and covering it with the other, until the entire suturing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of sewing is what the Galens call properly, it is like that which anyone makes, who puts together the two parts in a natural way, and calls one from one head to another, in this manner: prick an awl or near the chief of the mirach and pierce only that one, and leave the two joints together; then turn the awl and pierce from the back towards it inside the joint; then pierce one and the other from the back towards it inside the other side, on two more joints of the mirach on each side; and this is the manner of sewing in which there are many.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	The Galens say this word, and no one else testifies to it, that one must sew the belly with two needles if there is thread in each; and you must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other side, like those who sew corsets; and know that when the rupture is inside the belly, the sewing is more grievous than of the others on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The jugements of the wound are such as those of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, in so much as if the arrow has moved it, then reset the intestines and the cut; then apply powder with saltpeter and charcoal, and if the arrow has moved it, put on any ointment present, until the wound heals; and clean the fillet, and solder the suture, and the mirror; then cure the wound as other wounds are cured, till he is sane; and if you do not have medicines, then apply, immediately when they come to heal, cotton wool, and move it two times a day, till it be sane.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	But you do not need any other medicine besides for the simple wounds; and if you are in doubt that the wound may cause infection of the principal members, it is convenient to apply a light linen cloth soaked in hot poplar oil or rose oil between the angles, and under the joints; and if he feels pain or pus in the bowels, and this happens often, then give him wine vinegar cloves, and similarly when the pus comes from the intestine; and perceive that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "juin" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the power of the veins in it, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and its approach to its own nature from within.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the vein bursts from the wound, then you should put it back again as if it were the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it has become thickened and turned to a black color, it is fitting that you tie the healthy one which is black, for it does not bleed much, because it has veins and arteries; then strike what is between the ligature, and hang the two tendons down from the part underneath the wound until the vein stops bleeding, and the wounds heal.
de la routure dou boueil	of burning with the hot iron
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, so that it can be restored in some people, because I have seen that one man was pierced or stabbed with a lance; and the wound was on his right side under the stomach, and became inflamed and developed an abscess, and in this he had evacuation and vomiting; I treated him according to what I knew, and did not cease to subdue it until he was healed, and the pus dissipated.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him heal, I doubted that the sick had not had illness in his belly; and there was no malady, but he remained in better disposition, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he should be bound in such manner: take large straps to big testes, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the strap covers the mouth, put them up on both lips, so that they constrict his mouth again; and then strike the head, and this holds so that he cannot untie it, then put another strap after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; and tie the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a thin thread that has been cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the head of that thread of intestine which is much uncleaned, and then tie it to the head of that thread of fine linen twisted, and then pour the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it through; and this method of sewing is not fiery, except according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, just as it is in one of the intestines, there will be no healing or recovery unless with subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Things that all wounds or abscesses, when they ulcerate, are universally called "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and has turned purulent.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	Et fistule is according to the hardness of the nodulation of the vein that must be freed from being hard and waxy; or you do not feel pain, and it is like a bird's feather; and sometimes clean bowels, and at other times thick; sometimes little, and at other times enough; and I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed, and there is no discharge, is due to fire only by one of the seven causes: that is to say, by the smallness of the vein or flesh; or because it is malicious; or because of what has caused its hardness inside, and above the lips, that does not allow discharge to occur; or there are too many bowels; or the liver is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because of the corruption which is a manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late, the digestion is delayed, and the health is late, and it flees by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have shown all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I inform you of the remedy for fistulas which is made by hand work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	There are fistulas that occur in all parts of the body; because there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or from the scrotum, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or on some of the ribs, or to the spine at the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and thus as if they were near a principal part.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas of this kind are a source of disease and suffering, except for labor and ignorance; if there is any fistula that does not appear to be close to its opening when you said so, and you have faith in the cure, and it appears to be working, take a thread or iron rod, depending on whether the fistula is straight or curved; and if the fistula is curved, look for a subtle thread of wood, because the threads stretch through the curvature; and if the fistula has lost hands and you cannot find its opening by thread, wrap it around one of the lost hands, because the moisture is too short from one of the lost hands, and it will be cleaned off; then look carefully with your own skill, to see whether there are bones or nerves, and ask the patient where he feels pain when you press on that spot, and find out where it is; and when you know truly where it is, and whether it is close to a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or any of the places I have told you about, follow the remedy according to what I have told you, and remove the rotten parts and corrupted flesh that are inside; and then continue with the cure until it is healed, and if the fistula appears straight in front, copy it into its deepest part, as long as you can, and afterwards put moistened threads or medicine on the surface of the fistula, and apply them to the head of the opening, until the excess moisture is corrupted; and afterwards put clean ointments to heal the wound; and if it does not heal by this means, cauterize as we have said, and if the bones are corrupted from the fistula, copy it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	In case of a vein or nerve that is swollen or inflamed, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it until the corruption is completely opened, and then treat the cure with care until it is safe; and if it is not safe, and they bring him back to their former state, you should know that you are not doing well: if you uncover and require it so that you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore it; and if it is such that it is healthy, then it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If it is not so, you should know that the corruption has gone too far, that there is no hope for it: if there is only one source of trouble at nature's site; and if there are small bones corrupted, and you can treat them with pliers, if there is a suitable instrument available to you, and if there are many bones, you should remove all of them; and if moisture is against you, and there is no error or fear, then cut and apply pressure and charcoal, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you cannot remove them in one hour, then place the wound closed and put a dressing to prevent rotting, and leave it until the pus is inside the bones, and then they will have lighter bones; and if this is one large bone such as a thigh or knee, you should only stop the corruption so much that the black color is completely lost from the bone, and then heal the wound; and if there is a great part of the decay, and it comes to a mole on the bone; you must consider and cover all just until the corrosion, and then treat the patient until they are cured; and I will tell you about one case that happened in a man's leg, so that you take an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, until the matter arrived at the leg, and he ran away from a large abscess, and did not have any other reason to open it; but they misjudged by their foolishness so much that they opened the abscesses too much, and they corroded a great deal of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came a lot of pus that everyone feared for his health; and many physicians treated him within two years, and there was no solution in the art of hands, until I was called, and I went to see his leg and the medicines they used to treat him, and what corroded by the pus had a great impact on the body; and the young man's skin turned red, and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I have bounded a tent across one of these holes, and then searched everywhere for the holes, and found that some were coming together from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I came back then, and I cut across one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and it was found to be rotten and infected, and it came with infection all around the bone inside; I saw what appeared on the surface of the bone, and I thought that there was no other infection but that which I had taken out; and I began to heal the wound with medicines for a long time, and it would not heal; and then I started again, and I discovered the bone as before, and I found the infection continued in the bone, and I took it out, and I feared to solder it; but I could not do so until I cut across half of the bone, and pulled it out to its full thickness, and then I restored it with medicines; and it became healed and soldered quickly, and it did not require starting again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood is often performed, but it leaves the patient completely healthy, and a hard lump was formed in place of the bone, and he became of good disposition and did not have any hindrance or discomfort whatsoever, neither at rest nor on moving around.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, he will do this: take two ligatures, and tighten them at the head of the bone where it opens up, and command that they stretch upwards; and put another ligature made of a thicker linen over the first one, and tie it above the lump which has destroyed the bone, and set the joint so that you are pulling on the charred part downwards, and uncover the charred part below with your fingers or an awl, until you reach the surface where he is recovering, without blemishing the char; and put a splint or a table under the bone to cover up the corrupting lump; and do so again as soon as it can be seen and felt that there is corruption.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and corruption is in one part or another, so uncover the flesh entirely; then put a tusk under, and then sew from one part to the other the corruption, and sew it with the tissue long of the corruption as we have said; and if corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint, and sew the bone where it contains the other part; and if corruption is in the continuity of two joints, there is no other thing but a covering; and if corruption is at the finger of the hand or at the toe of the foot, it is very strong that place, but you must inquire how the corrosion opens; and make it clean with all sorts of ways possible, but so that the vein or nerve do not turn against you; and learn that the cutter and the sewings for covering these bones are many, according to the seat of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and subtlety, and their grandeur and smallness, and their hardness.
dou feu	Fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If the joints are swollen or due to infection, and when you have treated that corruption with medicine, and it does not help, then it is advisable to cover up that member until the source of the corrosion, and if the patient escapes from death by means of that corruption, or by the malice of the limb, which is more severe, a failure of the limb; and there are signs such as the members become blackened, so that it seems like they have been burned with fire, and after that blackness, the corrosion spreads to member after member, and takes over all the body; if you hurry to cover, and this is due to the percussion of certain venomous animals, such as scorpions from the sea and lizards and similar ones, when the corruption is at the head of the two, hit them, and do not give them any space before coming close to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Et s'elle vient jusque la main, si la coupe a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne vienne jusque bras; and if it comes just at the hand, so that the cut is on the joint, so that there will be no infection up to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, so that the cut is on the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that's a death, and nothing is useful for fires but the quantity of its virtue; and thus do it whenever corrosion comes on the bone: if it comes to the first joint, so that the cut is after the other joint; and if it comes on the bone, so that the cut all over the bone; and if it rises up in the knee, so that the cut is at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, so there is no other help for the sick man than to kill him with the lagger; and the manner of cutting or wrapping the member is such that you tie it both above and below, and extend one minister over the other, and then serve the cloth which is between the two threads at one span wide, until the bones are exposed; then cut or wrap, and put from each side a piece of linen, so that the cloth does not touch the healthy part, and comes to the sick man another lesion and an abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; 
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; 
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if their shoulders become bowed and indigestible after many years, they will know that the shoulders do not get better.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle veins are cut after long periods of time, do not despair of the health, for the healing is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men who take a long time to heal from their wounds, and those that do the opposite. And if the shoulders become bowed and indigestible after many years, know that the shoulders will not get better. And if the shoulders delay in healing, and are far away, then add dry medicines with moist substances, and dry virtues with moist qualities; as ointment defined, for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take ointment defined, and mix it with olive oil and vinegar, equal in substance. Then confine and use it; and the same thing makes an ointment cooked and swollen, when ointments defined are not present, or you take mercury and aloes and incense, and grind them, and make powder on the honey when it is on fire; and then wrap in glue and stretch on the shoulder, and sometimes administer an astrologer long, and roots of celestial lily, which is as if flour of times and centaurs; and use simple or composite remedies: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I said, and use it. And if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then know that corruption has gone through to the bone, or into the hard parts, or into the limbs; if the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the ungula
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	There is an abscess which forms beneath the ungula of the hoof of the foot, or under the toe, or by chance it forms in other parts; and when it becomes old, and no care is taken for it, if it forms a festering wound, they rush about it to cut away bowels so that they will cut out its root, and perhaps they will cut through the whole thing; and there comes the corruption just to the bone, until there comes great pain and pus, and the hoof becomes two large, and the color is foul.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, then it is necessary to copy onto it iron all the remaining flesh that is left on the ungula, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the fire cautery, it is a great help if the bones are sound and the joint is healthy; and if the joint presses on the bone, and starts to burn, and the pain increases, so it is convenient that you put the splint below the joint, and not under the bone, and strike with that char in a subtle and gentle manner, and apply medicines hot and corrosive to remove all; then treat with ointments until he is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, if you strike it and pull out, because as long as the bone is corrupted, he cannot heal; and if you see the flesh corrode, strike at the source so as was said before, then treat him until he is healed; and if he is ironed, and pierced, and he feels great pain, it is convenient to heal him first; then strike the joint with a subtle spatula, cutting across, above, and beware that the cut does not come too close to the bone, for the patient will feel too much pain; and if it has happened, put something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain comes from the hurt of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The double joints are swollen when some men are injured in the hands by chance, and sometimes there is bone damage, and sometimes it is an ulcer, and at times they do not appear to have been born in the joint area, or the birth occurs in any of the other bones.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are swollen in no way in the double joints do not move, and those whose birth is in the joint of the double joint may or may not move; the weight of one who is swollen is lighter in that manner: weight it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are swollen at the root of the joint are in pain to be cured: if you take it on the copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the child who is born or must be in the rear, if you prefer to copy first around the curve of the bone at the time just before the birth, then cut the bone at a suitable thread convenient for it, and then treat until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The ones that come in the sound of assembly arrive by birth, or by sudden blow, or by fire's burning, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary to cut the wound, if they must repair according to their natural forms; then put between two moist tents or drapes in olive oil, so that they do not heal; or put between two subtle pieces of cloth, until they are healed, as it seems fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the sore comes on either of his two hands with the palm, cut the wound if it seems fitting.
des vils	of evils
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	These swellings of veins big and swollen with melancholy fluid come in others' members of the body; and more often happens to those who walk on feet and work and carry, than to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you do not administer any purgation of bile, and then apply the salve of the basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron remedy is done in two ways: one is to lance it and treat the blackening wound; and the other way is to tie off the vein and extract all of its force.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting remedy is done in this way: first raise the leg of a hot water bath very strong, until the large veins are exposed and subtle; then pull up the leg of the sick from above down to the joint; then lance the vein at one end or two or three times, with a wide cut, then lift and treat the blackening wound by hand, from head to toe, until as much comes out as the patient can bear; and then tie it off and command that he eat meat with gall-black, and continue the evacuation and salving when the veins are full, and harm the sick person.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s'il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et il arose la jambe d'aigue chaude tant qu'elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n'as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the joint is bent and twisted and has all its parts gathered together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must break it severely, but do not cover it up; and pull it out as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron tool with which you cut the joint is curved, and do not pierce it; for if it is crooked, so will be the incision.
de la voinne civile	of the vein in the arm.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is bound or tied in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and on dry earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it springs up elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens because of corruption that comes from beneath the skin, as if a serpent were coming out inside the body through the flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	If the blood flow to the limb is cut off, a great inflammation will arise in the leg; then the swelling increases, and the vein begins to burst out like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If the bone is opened, it is advisable to wrap around a piece of wool from one and a half fingers up to two and a half fingers, on the knee, and let the wool stay on the leg, at all times when it's not in place, wrap the wool around the bone, and the new membrane; if it's too long, take part of it off, wrap the rest, but do not cover its root until it is entirely gone. For if you cut it, it will return into the flesh, and bring forth abscesses and putrefaction or worse disease; therefore this thing should be treated gradually, from head to toe, without any remaining parts in the body; and at times, this vein opens when treated for two palm-lengths, or X, and one hour has passed since I last saw a case where it came out of X palm-lengths long, and whenever you cut it, there will be either bleeding or ulceration, and perforation to its root, so that everything is gone; and the material inside is empty, and bring in new medicines every day to prevent putrefaction, then treat the patient as usual.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes at this vein the blood flows, and itself when it opens in the joint of the foot or the toe, and much of the blood comes out, and from which there is a great amount of blood. Cure then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between the skin and the flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "maladie de buef" in our land because it often affects cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and it moves throughout the body upwards and downwards, causing pain everywhere from limb to limb, until the skin cracks or it bursts out, and causes foul odor; and it is covered with putrid humors, like serpents and lizards and pinworms in the belly; and one doubts its malice because when it goes through the body, it rises to the head, and sometimes enters the eye, and destroys it.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you look to cure and treat the patient, if it cannot be done in the night: then it is therefore necessary that you hold him tightly above and below with a strong, closely tied bandage, then strike up and treat him, and if he is drawn to the fire by force in such manner that he does not get burned, so much the worse for him; and the greater harm he causes is that his oil flows, as we have said; and if you see it coming near or close to the head, tie down below with a tight bandage first, then strike up, and treat him; and it is therefore necessary to use the patient with solute medicines of flesh for bad humors, and to waste from flesh putridity.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and it moves from member to member; and I saw this which I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and then it started to rise again as quickly as a worm on my shoulder, faster than anything else, like living silver when it cuts into her at another point; the pain left that point and fixed itself on the shoulder, and then a little later it ran all over the body until she came back with it in the other arm; then she told me that it had turned again inside the body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed a great deal that she moved around in such a manner from member to member, because I had never seen this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Toutevoie, I have wanted to know for a long time that most people have moved with great pain in their joints, but I did not wish it so, as I saw in the woman; and I thought it was because of this that the women had hard bodies, and uncovered breasts, and because of this they appear constrained; and do not appear according to this reason for those who are healthy, and have moist bodies and veins restored.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see treating this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens itself as we have said, if the above and below are hastening, and then strikes on it so that the constrained ventosities in the limbs cease to be; and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it with your eyes, if the cure of those who bind the ventosities, such as fetid pills, serpent pills, and similar ones.
des saiettes	due to arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the state of the body or where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of their types is that there are those with great points, and small ones, and arrowheads, and soles; and of those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those where there are pieces; and arrows that pierce in any member pierce according to two manners: or they pierce in the principal member, such as brain, liver, spleen, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	So when an arrow pierces in any of these members and you see the signs of death that I will tell you after, it is fitting that you remove this arrow, because death comes after in many dispositions; and if this sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not stuck deep into the flesh, then take it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l'os, and the signs of the brain when a vein bleeds into an organ and cuts through bone, and falls to the surface near the brain, is a cause of scotomia and seizure and excitation and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and alteration of perception, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it may occur without fever of the nose or ears; and by chance it may affect the voice and speech; and falls into a wound that appears like pus, and also as if burned with charcoal; and if these signs appear to you, then hold back from the treatment, and leave the vein alone when it is not in place.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the vein when it bleeds or blood comes out is that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it has been pierced in something hard, not empty; and by chance the vein may stop flowing like the pus, and comes with a black color of blood, and cold sweat, and fainting: these signs tell you to doubt whether death has come.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of the arrow that never swells is without any discharge of pus from the wound, and the throat becomes inflamed, and the patient's skin turns red, and they sigh heavily and complain of the pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	But if the arrow discharges pus under the cover of the flesh at the base of the ribs, it causes swelling and great pain, and they sigh heavily, and all their limbs stiffen.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	But if the arrow discharges from the stomach, by chance it may burst out of the wound with nothing but indigestible meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	But if the arrow discharges into the belly and bursts out of the intestine without any fat or other substance, there is no hope for recovery or extraction from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	If an arrowhead is cast into the bladder, and urine flows forth in great quantity, and it comes out to void, and the patient feels great pain: seek that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, as if the head and neck and chest and shoulder and arm and back and spine and ribs and groin and thighs and limb resembling ones are saved according to more severe dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When an arrowhead is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, because of what happened to me, so that you may do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened at a house with an arrowhead stuck in the cheek or temple at the root of the nose: I pulled it, and tore it out from under the fatty tissue of the ear, and was soon well.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	Instruct the patient to put on an arrow sheath that is stuck in the fat under the paper, and the arrow sheath should be returned, and you can only reach as far as the point towards his fist, and it was a large Turkish arrow of all sorts of iron until now, and the game was safe, and no bad accidents happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And tie an arrow shaft from the throat of a Christian, and it was a Turkish arrow: I tied the beards, and made it subtle enough that I could tie it, and the Christian was safe.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And tie an arrow shaft on a patient who was lying on his stomach, and I thought he had died; but after thirty days passed, without changing his condition; I cut under the arrow, and tied it in place, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a person who has an arrow stuck in their back or side, and the wound is closed with stitches; and the arrow remains inside them for a long time, and they do not obey their natural disposition, nor find any nuisance in any of their works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another person who has an arrow stuck in their face, and the wound is closed with stitches; and they suffer such great pain for a long time; and there are many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And the arrow was stuck in the person of a king, who was wounded in the neck and had begun to lean towards the right side; and the wound was completely closed after three days. I was summoned by the doctor after that incident.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound to be very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I have tried to guess what the text means.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the edge of the blanket I put on the patient's breast and stomach, because the swelling would reduce; and then appeared the swelling of the blanket.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the poultice on his hands for a few days, and healed the wound directly underneath it, and kept him thus for such a long time, until he felt the swelling of the blanket inside his neck; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put medicine with a corrosive agent on the wound for several days, until it was opened, and tried it, and felt the head of the swelling which dried up inside; then I adjusted it by opening the wound with that medicine, so that the swelling's edge became visible; and after four months, I cut open the wound with the tenacious ones, both from one side and the other, and could not get out; therefore I did not stop subtilizing and devising ways to use instruments, until I got one day tenacious well-made, according to what its shape will come at the end of this chapter, as I tried it and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they judge that the cartilaginous tissue of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you apply your cure to what I did not say, for the books cannot grasp everything; but the wise masters have knowledge about a little more thing, and on what is present and faltering, find a new work and nine instruments, at the removal of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not penetrate the limbs at which they are shot except in two manners: either by the joint in which they enter, or by another part; and when it is true that they break through on one side, that is because they enter into a hollow bone, and now this happens every time.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	In case the vein cannot be opened now, let it remain closed until the skin is open and swollen; and so if it is punctured into the bone, and it cannot come out, let it remain thus for some days, and move it every day; and then it will come out, and if it does not come out, pierce into its interior to get to the root of all this, until the swelling subsides and then take her out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	But if the arrow is punctured into the bone of the skull and stays just in front of one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the accidents I have mentioned to the patient: do not treat it yourself, but let it remain closed until it has become swollen after some days, because if the arrow comes out exactly as this is lodged, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck in the bone alone, but also comes out from under it, and the patient stays there some days without another accident, then they must apply more force to treat.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very stuck in that way and cannot come out for any reason, so you apply tartar to it as I have told you; then treat the patient until they are healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is returned to the body of the man so that it cannot be seen, and the head has lost its shape; and if you feel it, but there is no suitable instrument available; and if you cannot stretch the wound due to the tightness of the arrowhead, and the depth of the wound, where there is neither bone nor nerve visible, then take great care that the wound be large enough; and take out the arrow as much as you can, and if it has ears stuck into it so that they hold in place; then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you may take them out as much as possible; and be subtle that you do not break the arrow, but rather pull it out more carefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, when the arm is pulled up to the shoulder so that it is torn apart, then pull it, for the extraction hurts a lot.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the blood flows again after it has been treated contrary to what we said in this chapter; then apply the treatment as we have instructed; and guard against the incision of the nerve and vein, and put on linen as you wish to treat the arrow wound with great care, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the patient according to how they were when the arrow was cut into him, for that is the greatest aid that can be done, and if you cannot do so, then put them according to what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, or opens any part of it, or if the skin is inflamed towards a certain place as can be seen or felt; then raise him then, until the tongs can take hold, and then pull him out, if possible.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is held in the bone, turn your hand around, so that it enters into the bone and expands the bone, then take it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it will not come out, if you leave it alone, and then continue the extraction until it does come out; and if it is stuck in an arrow shaft, pour some wine into the entire shaft; and if it has fallen apart, administer vinegar, so that you apply a tweezers instrument, where the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then pour (the blood), and if the arrow shaft is on its head, then pour the instrument with the pointed end inside, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrow shaft is touched, if it suits that you copy the entire wound area where the venom is, if possible, then treat the wound as it covers.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Instruct the patient to let his hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their birth, hold your eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the shears used to cut off bandages are like a bird's beak, and thus here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in many sizes: great, medium, and small, according to the size of the bandage.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the tool for pulling hair is like the feathers of a bird, to push to the tip of the bandage, as it is this form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of shears for pulling and tying if it is here:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins on the body common.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Veins to cure are XXXI, because it has XVI veins, which is to say: two branches that are after the ears, called "the two 'herbech'"; and two arteries that are in two temples appearing; and two veins that are in two cheekbones of two eyes, called "aspires"; and a vein that surrounds the forehead; and a vein at the top of the nose; and two gundges that are on the neck; and two veins that are above the lips, which are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	In every common vein is V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is found on the left side of the costal region, and they call it the people "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and they call it by the people "vein of the heart"; and the basilic one is on the right side of the costal region, and they call it by the people "vein of the belly", and it is under the ribs, and it is that vein which heals, which opens manifestly under the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the ulnar vein is the vein that is between the auricular and the anular, and it has two branches; and in the arm and the foot are three veins: one is below the cubital fossa on the left side of the costal region, and the second is at the ankle on the right side of the costal region, and the vein called "nesse" which is at the other ankle; and in the other leg there are three veins below those ones.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Instruct the patient that if there is an injury on both temples, so that it is old and recent, and ophthalmic customary, and at the eye of the tear is applied; and the qualities of the sainier are as I say: and they strain the neck until both veins open completely; and feel the pain below the tendon, and then take the lancet under; lift the vein up high to the neck index, and cut it with the lancet, as you have done in two other veins, and make a stroke according to your need; then remove the patient, and put the tendon on the vein for an hour, then put cotton; and then form the wound, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about this and its cutting and its extraction, as we began at the start of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The sickness of the vein on the front is worth as much as the sickness of the head when there are old pains and emigraine, and redness; and the qualities are such that the patients twist their necks until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "foisseur", whose shape is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and pierce straight up with your hand, or with another thing, and let the wound issue as much as you see; then lift the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is sane and never again has a flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not fitting that the wounds be too sharp; and the healing be crooked, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the wound when it is delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The patient's veins that are in the two armpits should be tied up and at the joint, and to the wound, and to the redness, and to the swelling, and to the boil in the oil, and for the diseases of the face; and it is known that when the malady tightens its neck by twisting any string, as before; then the wound, and so should the wound be done through the thickness, a little short in length with flame a little wide, because there is no point of cartilage.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, in case it breaks; then do a stitch through the wound, so much as you have need, and then tie up the cloth, and tie well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The wound of the neck in the area of the chin if it causes fever, and strong swelling, and diseases of the face, so that it migrates and redness comes to the face, and particularly when it is old; and it is known that the malady tightens its neck, then tightens its neck with your left hand, and take a subtle flame long, and prick at the gap between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well in this area, and it begins to start bleeding now; and do not go too fast or forth, and do a stitch through the wound as needed, then tie up for one night, because it is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	Instruct the sick person to let their hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold their eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
de la sainie des leivres	From the wound of the breasts.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The wound of the veins of the lips above is aided by caustic in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, fissures of the lips, and ulcers.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the wound is to sit the patient in front of you, and constrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at both veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which can be recognized by their color being black, and by the small black lines that surround them: strike then one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and are in doubt, strike the largest of each part, and likewise do it for both veins that are above and below, as it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the wound below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The wound of the veins that are below the tongue is helped after the head wound, and it's due to the constriction of the neck, and diseases of the eye, and mouth; and if you cut carefully enough, so that the patient sees between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks under each costal edge a vein black: then heals both, and don't go too hard on it, for below they are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the arm that are cut, commonly healed in two ways: either by poking at a large, mint-like flame or an olive tree fine as a needle, called "anesil"; and they are made large and subtle according to the size and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The fiery form of mercury is very renowned, and it is large as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins of the forehead, flat and with big blood appearing, which contain big blood and trouble; and it is the fiery form olive oil:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtle pointed, and it is for healing the subtle veins, or where there are subtle blood citron.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic salve, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are in the throat, and on the neck, and on the belly, and in the stomach; and it is convenient to a physician that he cures severely, and warms from the artery that is under.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he strikes the artery, and blood comes forth, then he must cauterize as I said; but not with strong fire, but rather with scalds like honey.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the joint of the elbow does not open immediately, it is necessary to force it and change another one, or you want to apply any remedy on it, or you will heal it in place with the wound: it opens immediately; and cuts at the flame once more, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the swelling of the joint, it is necessary also to squeeze the arm, until you know the size of the swellings; then mark the joint with a wedge, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein at the flame once more: and beware that you do not strike in the artery, when you see the joint swollen, for this is an artery: avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it bursting up high like the urine of a child, and they are red and subtle, know that it is not an artery: hurry then, and put on the dressing long and thick, then pull out the bandage if there is no stain, for this often happens; bind the arm, and leave it in that way, and do not move the sick person; and let there be fear, and do not move them until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If they are not stained and you bleed, and it is vain to wait for the medicine to arrive, then cut the artery when it is open, because the head of the vein will be retreated; and stain them.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a scab of the fistula and cut it, and take one of the halves and tie it well to the other shoulder; if they do not bleed, that is good; but if not, then apply the medicines we have said that stain blood, because the bleeding is not painful for more wounds and for the small vein of the wound, and for the power of the binding of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The patient who has the vein in the middle is advised to apply medicine to the head above and to the body below because it is composed of basilic and cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary to the lord that he should warm for the nerve that is below, and if you prick too much into the joint, and you find the nerve, and it swells and they recover are painful, and by chance they do not heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in anyone for its subtlety, it is necessary to clean the sires of the instrument before using them; and pull out the nerve to your best.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then hold fast.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The headache of the cephalic is treated by drawing blood from the head, and tending to the eyes; and it is advantageous to prick at the flame of olive oil or at the flame of myrtle, for this is the safest of all veins, because there are no nerves nor arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Whenever possible, it is better to look for the lighter vein first, and do not worry if it requires doing it the first time, because we must repeat; and by chance some swell the veins of others when they are done for the first time, but it does not cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to one's opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	In the first instance that you must know to heal, if healing is not ordained by necessity but only for preserving health and warding off diseases; and it is done in one of the three veins: head, fast, and basilic; and one should be healed at the beginning of prayers, and in autumn and winter after fasting, when the sign of replenishment appears; and one should be healed the first day or on the third day, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The healing that is done for diseases has no fixed time determined, but rather when need arises of day or night, in all hours and in all seasons; and it does not suit to heal children under 14 years old, nor women who are pregnant except after the sixth month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They who have passed LX years are not to be cured.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when some one wishes to be cured, in any manner whatsoever, it is fitting that he infuses the intestines with a light castor oil, if he has much bile retained, so that the veins do not attract harmful fluxes to the principal members; nor does one cure those who are too salty with food, or who have fever, whether of the body or the mind; and if they come forth from curing after having had colic, vomiting, and a decline in the bowels, and many times lying with a woman, working, watching, and marrying, it is all that virtue, either through the arm or by the body; then subtle the humors, removing them without excess, by food and drink and medicine, since one has lost a pound; then take an bath, if no other thing fails, to subtilize the sickness, and be cured of the vein on the third day, as we have said; and beware that day of work, and pain, and lust, and similar things; and be bound and free, being healthier than those who are cured, and rubbing the arm twice or three times, then straining the ligament halfway, because when it is too tight or loose, it cannot move without it; and then rub the limb with oil as hands, until the veins swell, and they feel on one; then pour the castor oil into the sainieres, a little of its flame, then put his should on that vein under the arm, where he wishes to be cured, so that the vein does not fail and let him fall.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For in these veins there are some that flow like strings to the vein, and there are others that are full of windiness, such that when you place the flame on it, it retracts again, and cannot open the vein, and so is one of those; and if he cuts a vein, then the wound is too narrow, because of this they should be advised by the physicians in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens up for the first time, it is good; but if not, then he has to reapply again a little below or above where the lump is.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the lump is inflamed, and the patient hopes for it to resolve on its own, he should let it heal for one or two days and not bind the arm: by chance some abscess may form; nor should he enter the bath, then reapply the treatment again whenever it pleases; and if the puncture is small, he should subtly cut beneath without causing too much blood to come out, as you have seen so far, for this has happened many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the inflamed liver, do not restart the surgery, and put a little bit of oil upon it, for it relieves the body from pain, and softens the bond in that liver that the oil; and thus administer the oil to each wound that you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and this same thing is done with the triangle and bow of the horse, when you put it on the liver; so subtly do not cut and spare it when it is too big.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a big abscess comes upon you, which has happened many times, especially when it is only sutured at those times or the vein opening is small, hasten and put on the liver a moist sponge soaked in water and with some salt, and constrain for an hour; and it is advisable to do this after the issue of the blood from the vein, and if it remains on the liver after some days without any harm or good, it will not harm you; and if you see, put on some aloes or mirre remade in calamine juice, marker, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times have an abscess and appearance at the site of the injury: put then your hand on it, and if you find it soft to the touch with the pressure of the hand, then that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So avoid putting anything on what we have said, because in case you cut without the artery; but make it dry and hard to begin with, then apply another treatment until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because if it is not black, let it bleed out until it is red; and if you see it as thick, let it bleed out until it is subtle; and if it is too thick, let it be cooled.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	Instruct the one who is weak and feeble, and in need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and have longer flails; and for the one who is frail, do the opposite, and it will be better and more frequent for their health, and they should be healed by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of healing is safe from the decay of blood and the bruising of nerves, and it is worth more than the healing done quickly or slowly.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one whose blood needs to be drawn for healing, it is fitting to give them milky pain in grape juice; if they are scorched, cut into three or four places; and if they have a cold complexion, make their milk pain sweetened with syrup of muskmelon, or with aromatic syrup of honey mixed with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a very fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if the patient has a boil, after a great deal of blood is drawn from it, it is fitting to make him drink broth of char, and sweet-smelling syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to break off some part of his arm and heal again when it has failed, then it is fitting, when he is weakened by a great loss of blood, that he slowly recovers little by little, according to the continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to break off some part of his arm after the first bleeding, and has strong blood, then he will recover in 7 hours after the first bleeding, or no more than an hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to heal another part, should he need to be healed the next day or a third of the day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, and fait venir fievre; 
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is severed, then let it heal and do not tightly bind it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if a wound needs to be treated again in the same place, or in another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein has been severed in the same place as the vein of the head, because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of the wound if it is that the patient pours their hand into hot water until the finger turns red; then bind it moderately, so that the vein appears well; then clean the wound now across, not too large or too long; and pierce the large wounds, and suture them well near the joint of the hand, and if without fail there is no escape, then put the hand into hot water again, and let the wound cure in the water until you have enough; and if it remains this way, do not pour the hand into hot water again, for it puts more in cold than in convalescence; and the wound of this vein is safer than all other veins, with no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The sickness of the salvation of the right hand is worth all the other diseases of the liver, and this is the way: strain the hand, and pour it into hot water, until the wound is clean, if you see; and if the wound is crossed, and if you cut the entire thing in one go, do not grieve anything; and do not go too fast by force, because the nerves are stripped of all their strength at that moment, and then put the hand back into hot water, if it does not freeze in the wound, and will come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have cut the wound as much as necessary, put a vein and sinew oil on it to solder hastily, and do this for each part.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sickness in the left hand is worth the disease of the mouse, and do this just as I told you to the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sickness of the spleen is worth all sorts of diseases that are outside the body, as diseases of the marrow, and retention of pus, and disease of the joints, and ancient diseases of the legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of his spleen are that if the sick person puts some stone in hot water, and strokes it on the vein until it dies, and binds above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot there go much more blood; then healing takes place when it is either larger or smaller than usual, or when it is at the ankle.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal above the foot, then beware of the swells that are below, and the healing from cutting through as in copying; and let the sores remain.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if they cannot move out of it, so put the foot into water, and let well clean the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the wound is sutured for the first time, so reattach it on the second attempt above a little more, because the skin is salt; do not doubt of nerves, as we have said, and do similarly with the ligature of the other foot evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The skin of the scrotum is attached at the ankle and its suture value is equal to the pain in the groin when it's cut.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of its suture if are such that the patient will take a bath, and pull upwards from the ankle three fingers, for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then suture in all ways that you can, and crosswise; and it is much harder to tie than to cut.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	If you do not find it, so healthy any rain on the open or back of the foot, and towards the small toe, and guard yourself from harm; make as much care in the wound that you see, and then release the tie, and put on cotton and bandage; now she is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of wounds caused by suction
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or thorns, or glass; and suction is done in two manners: either by striking and attracting the wound, or by striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction done by striking is in two manners: either it is with fire on the whole face; or with fire; and suction done by striking and pulling out the wound is made in thirteen places of the body, so that one is on the top of the head; and others are near the neck; and two others on each shoulder; and the ventouse under the chin; and under the elbows; and above the knees; and the ventouses between both arms; and the ventouses on both legs; and the ventouses on both ankles; and this suction does not apply to wounds, unless to small veins scattered throughout the flesh, so that no harm is done, as one makes a vein dressing; and it should not be administered except with fire or by striking, in any disease caused by overfilling, until all the body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	Instruct the patient to let their hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it comes to an inflammation of the month, we instruct the surgeon to open the vein after three hours on the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The inflammation of the spleen is most helpful to the coldness of the head … that comes to the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this operation is in place of the splenic disease, and should not be used by one with a hot complexion, or who has catarrh, because it causes great harm; and therefore it should not be used by those who are keeping watch, or who have cold head ailments.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from this often become blind, and therefore it should be placed a little lower by the incision for the blindness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The left side of the neck is in its place at the joint of the shoulder and chest and basilica, and for this reason it is painful to press with the fingers, and breaking open the channel of the arm, and bruising, and swelling; and it should not be pressed too much, because if she holds it too tightly, it causes oblique or stomach pain and to the heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventosation has two sides of the neck if it causes pains in the head, eye pain and emigraine, and strangulation and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is in place of the basilica; therefore it is necessary to order the lord that he presses his hand on putting, so as not to strike the artery, and wait until blood flows.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	Ventosation below the chin causes mouth sickness, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases in the mouth; and is in place of the wounds on both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders value the disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windings of the sides value as much as three veins in the arm, because they cause blood loss from these large veins; and instruct the lord that he should not cut too deeply, for the skin is bare of flesh, and feels pain beneath and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The wound that is under the buttocks values as much as moroses in the root, and other diseases below, so it's necessary for the wound to be large and filled with earth, because if it were subtle, it would break; and thus makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The wounds of the legs heal largely, because they cause blood loss from all over the body, and are equal to old pains in the rains, and marrs, and bladder, and draw out the flowers; and are like two soles, and two knees, and harm the body after a long time, and make come pale in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	Instruct the patient to put on the ventouse first when empty, and to apply it perfectly, and then have it ready, and move it equally, and do not stop doing this until you see the limb red and swollen, and feeling the redness of the wound; then, release, and remove the ventouses, and take care in the arrangement of the dead, because there are such people who have broken bones, and delicate things: if it is necessary to pierce only once, and it is advisable to make large wounds, and a little deeper, and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is not big, then you must pierce twice: once to subside the large wound.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very thick, then it is advisable to pierce the third time; and when we try to apply a small amount of the wound a little at a time, so that we suffer only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	Instruct the patient if you wish to cut a lot of blood, so frequently bleed again; and if the wound is swollen, then prick it firmly, and the ends are that they will be perceived suddenly, and pay attention to him who has thick skin and hard, and who have many pores, that you anoint them with the oils of olives, dissolving and aperitive: if this is for you, use olive violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil; and if it's in yveir, use cresson oil, or lettuce, or camomile, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	If the superfluence is large and cold, take on olive amber oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	If the hairs are long and even, do not put point of oil on them; but after the cauterization with rose water, cold water, mulberry water, cucumber water, porcelaneous water, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they raise themselves with rose water of myrtle and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large suppurations, they raise themselves from old wine, cold water of rue, or decoction of anise and camomile, or similar things; and do not want to recover by venesection before the bath or immersion, but after the bath for one hour or two; and do not sleep after the evacuation, and must wait that they can be evacuated, when they need to be evacuated and when they are evacuated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	Instruct the patient who is recovering to be cautious of his temper and if he is not too angry and inflamed; then it is advisable for him to take cold things such as pears, grapes and endives and lettuce at ease, and similar things; and eat pottage, and char broth, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey and sweet-smelling wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat pottage, and small fowl and pigeons; and the day before he is going to recover, he must drink more than he eats; and it is advisable to give some people a trifle or muscat wine once in a while before the recovery, or after, for comfort of the main limbs; but be cautious without it, because it is not good that those who are hot should drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles qui sont mises sur le foie et sur la mice, et podagre, et sur le ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sur le ventre et sur la boude pour amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sur le foie et sur la mice quand il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont vuides pour sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes plaines d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cauterizing vessel administered to fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two of equal size and half a palm in depth, and has a groove at the middle with a small hole, as if to put a needle, and is made of wood soft before so that it does not bleed the patient when placing on the member; and has a bar of iron or wood crossed over at the midpoint to hold a bandage, and they are large and small as per the diseases and age of those who take them; for the cauterizing vessels of children are different from those of adults, and small ones are used for thin people, and large ones for fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And thus one must put this cauterizing vessel on the member: take a candle of wax or linen and wrap it around the cauterizing vessel through the bar that is in the cauterizing vessel, so that the light is at the bottom of the cauterizing vessel, so as not to burn the patient; and then place it on the member, with your fingers above the hole we have mentioned, if you wish to let the vapor go out, and when you take away the cauterizing vessel; and wrap on the linen as before, and rewrap often, if need be.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the case of the patient with pleurisy, who has high fever, he should not have blood or pus, and he should be treated only when he is full of fever, and placed on the limb alone; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Blood vessels are treated only in limbs where you cannot put a vein, just like nails and gums, and similar ones; and in their nostrils, just like two or nose, and other similar ones; and the quality of the treatment is such that when you find blood vessels that are in pure and clean water without danger, take them; and put one nut in clear water, until they become familiar with it, and have nothing in their stomachs; and then apply vein and vein again, and rub the limb until it's red, and put on the stitches; and when they're full of blood, and swell, if you can put a vein, put it, because this is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If it is not so, then lift the limb from the cold and put in warm water, and then try it out; and if the limbs are healthy again after a period of absence, then wet the bandage with cold water and apply it, until they are stanchioned; and if they become swollen many times, then apply vitriol crushed or vinegar, and similar things, until they are stanchioned; or put on the limb half of boiled peels, and leave them until they dry on the limb, so that now it will be stanchioned; and if you have more need, take other poultices.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the poultices do not take, then rub the limb with fresh poultice, or prick an arrow until it bleeds, and then apply them; and as soon as they feel the poultice, they will dry up; and when you see that they begin to flow, then powder on a little aloes and powdered silver, or ashes, so that they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the beginning of a medical book, "The Book of Injuries
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that this art is rarely seen in the writings of the ancients, and they do not read any books or letters on it; and for this reason, the science has been lost in our land, because I did not find a good one anywhere, and I do not know anything, except by the knowledge of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated them with science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life; and I have described here what is contained, and condensed it in the end, and shown clearly the forms of the fractures, as I did in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we say in this book's prologue the sums of the word and the chapters where the wise men put their understanding, and keep on with the virtue, so that those who have been proven can learn and acquire this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when any break or dislocation or torsion or swelling comes to anyone, it is necessary to hasten to heal the sick person from one side and from the other, if nothing stops them, such as weakness of the body, or sickness, or old age; or if they are in extreme cold, which is known as frostbitten joints, and charred flesh of birds and deer, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not overload themselves with too much meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about an abscess or swelling in the joint; for it is often seen that those who fall ill return to their previous state.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones start to restore, it is fitting that you nourish the patient with foods that cause great swelling, or have viscosity, such as bread cooked in water, and risotto, and testes, and pike, and panca of veal, and oysters, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the swelling is most represented by muscles and more quickly the break occurs.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of old and decrepit people cannot be well taken in again or soldered according to their nature because of the drying of the members, nor can those who are too tender, like the bones of small children; but there is no cure. So set large splints on the broken bone, which hold together the member as best it can, until it becomes so that it was before; and do not keep all its work to itself, and for this reason they must nourish with great foods, just as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And knows that fractures are different in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or thigh, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that occur from a blow to the neck, and others that happen by cutting, just like the length of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture with only a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each kind has its own tool and instrument for restoration, according to what is remembered in its place; and it's known the fracture of the bone by how the limb is twisted, and opens well when forced, and sounds like a bone when pressed with the finger; but if there's no twisting or sound at the joint, and the patient does not feel great pain, unless there's a point of fracture; but they can still have twisting, a small split, or a slight fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary to move your hand, but apply medicines that come after this, then hold now with subtle restraint.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that when a break occurs in the arm, and the two joints are separated, it is now necessary to put them back on an even basis, so that they do not form abscesses; and if abscesses form there, let one day pass, until they are healed; then put it back on the joint that you can easily feel, and know that the restoration of the other part is lighter than the restoration of this one where pieces remain; then hold, as it should be done afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, and you feel two parts, it is either with a large piece or with your hand, or with small members, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand; then put the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the injured limb are diminished, you restore them through all kinds of means on the joint that you can feel, and avoid that by your work the patient suffers a new injury or pain; and add well both joints of the bones in their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels well in the hand if it seems to you that he is not at all: if the dress is done perfectly, and is not strained too much, nor pressed like those who are doing this because of their own work, with pain and contraction on the member, as we have often had.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is fixed, instruct the patient well so that it does not move, nor watch, nor sleep, nor turn, nor in any other way; and carefully take care that the limb be so secure that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	But when he feels no pain, it is not fixed, and you must take care to put him in a certain disposition so that he does not feel any pain; and carefully guard that he be placed correctly, lest twistedness comes upon him when restored; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The body parts that break are diverse in size, shape, and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For the small members, such as fingers and toes: it is necessary to wrap them with soft linen drapes; and for those that are large, like knees and legs: it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and sturdy rope. For the large ropes embrace the entire limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no breakage. Then tie over gentle wraps, three or four according to the member, and tighten your hand on the rope, then go up to the top of the fracture and loosen it a little, so that the fracture will move slightly. And gradually loosen the rope, so much that you take hold of a large part of the healthy limb; then put on another rope, and turn back over the break; then return below the break, and loosely tighten, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first sentence above; then place linen or drapery wraps between the ropes, until it is entirely equalized; then tie everything from above with a bandage, and then put your splints well made on top, if there is an abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if it has an inflammation or abscess, put on soothing ointment to the inflamed place, and who operates on the inflammation, let it remain for some days; then strain over those wounds, and sew with a chain rope of one-fifth width, or a log used for cleats, or palm wood, and according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the chain rope which one puts on the breakage be slightly larger and wider than the others; and so long as it suits the limb of small or large size; then bind over those wounds just as you have done at the first suture, then tie above with a flexible thread, just as in the first suture on the breakage; tighter is above, softer below; and it is necessary that the thread be medium, not too thick or too thin, and made of linen yarn; for if the thread are too big, as I wanted to do my work done by the foolish ones who make their sutures with cordage of fine linen twisted, and this is a great error, because the suture cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not suit that there be less than two fingers' breadth between each stitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is sick from the stings of these arrows after stretching in their strength, then they must apply ointment of linen or wool to stop the bleeding.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the tendons are broken, I will tell you the cure as follows.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to strain the entire limb every time with a fracture on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it is not necessary to apply arrows on every member every time with a fracture; but after 4 or 7 days, or more according to the swelling of the abscess present at the site; and here I will tell you the manner of the ancient apothecaries for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsion: that you take flour kept in the walls of the mill, and mix it with a great quantity of fat, and make this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it is the common way of restoring fracture at more than one disposition; and myself, as well as women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to restore the break and dislocation and twisting: take 12 grains of lead arsenic and ladanum and oroside and asafetida and gum arabica and muga, ana X; myrrh and aloes, ana V; alechil VIIII; and make a powder, and mix with honey with a little wine; if the complexion of the oil is hot, use this ointment because it is of good composition, and restores the broken bones quickly, and saves more men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to oint that is for twisting: take muga and visnalmum, ana X; myrrh and aloes, ana VIIII; camphor VI; boric of Armenia X; grind well, and confine with water or a little wine, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to treat a joint and bone separation, remove the joints and bones from their place, and ease the pain that follows, and use the bone to mend it: take new linen, apply oil easily in hot water, and put them back in place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plaster dressings do not restore the joint, but they are good for soothing an abscess and properly treating pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to treat a fractured bone that restores the bones: take dry fig leaves and earthly leaves, crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to treat plaster for restoring the fracture of the bone and to alleviate the swelling of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Pick the root of wormwood, camomile, violet flowers, flour of vine, one part from each; and grind, and mix with wine, and apply to the members while they are heated, or mix with moist coriander water, or water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of applying plaster more forcefully than the first, when an abscess hardens at the restoration of a limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Pick the root of wormwood, and the seed of flax, balsam, melilot, and sanssouci, and violet flowers and camomile flowers, each one a part; grind, and mix with salty water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Iporcras says in his book that you should not put on the broken limb a plaster made of wax and oil alone, but rather something more, and he says it should be neither too dry nor too moist.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that we must place a poultice on the broken limb, to restore health, dry things made warm, like mirrors and alum and incense, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat the wound and pain: take meat and horsehair of a dead man, or bird quills, and vinegar, and make it equal in size, break it up, and make an poultice with the limb.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then wait a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor that their bone is out of place; if it does not come back in its place by hand, or if they have pain, swelling or redness, if you hasten, and remove it, and now apply the poultice again; and take a light bandage, and a sponge soaked in moist water, and plunge in the water, and lift up the limb, until the itching stops and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour, and put on a dry linen, moistened with water or oil rose, and tie it over a nut, until you are sure that the abscess has healed; and rest the inflammation of the limb, and allow the pain to cease, then resume gentle movements, and apply a poultice again, and do not strain it too much as before; and be gentle until it is sound.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess has chaus and is red and painful and swollen, I have set a bone there to make it whole again, and you must apply plaster and bind it, if it swells again, as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if this does not come to the limb as we have said, then do not unbind it for more than three or four or five days, and never let it remain for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the fracture heals, and approaches the joint near; then tighten it even more than before, and feed its flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that it dries out more than needed, know that swelling cannot come from it; therefore take care of it with hot water and vinegar every time you unbind it, and do this on the tenth day, and a little later. By this work, then cut off the swelling from the limb, and make haste to apply what the foolish doctor does, which will remain in the limb twisted: that is bad, and if it is done badly, I see no other thing but that of binding and overdoing it straightly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various kinds of breaks
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many kinds of breaks, and various forms, and the causes are determined; for there are fractures that are made by the force of a sword, and the cartilage is broken all along with the bone just beneath it, like a blow or a punch; and thus this kind of fracture is called «haichure».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword strikes the bone on both sides to pierce it, and this is called a fracture «absolue», because of the two wounds resulting from these two fractures whether large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has penetrated deeply into the bone, or is a split, or breaks through the joint of a stone, or pierces above the stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a persisting fracture, which approaches just beneath the skin or above the bone, or it is this wound that is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is covered with bone as thin as our nails, and there are small splits, and because of this they call this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound is made by hitting a stone, or falling, or some similar thing, and pushes a piece of bone into the body, and the little hairs (chevez) become as when the blacksmith heats over the fire when he heats his bellows; so there goes in the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their head, as when they are children; and it happens in all these kinds of fractures where small pieces come out like stones. And I will speak about them on his behalf.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by removing them, and inquiring about them, and by the corrupting flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The shape of the hair is known by this: when you have discovered the bone and rubbed above it, if you open the dark fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, take care of any accidents that occur to the patient, and if you do not see any bad accidents, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, pale skin, fever, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar dispositions, then it cannot be cured without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any extraordinary accidents, and you expect good health, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the arm comes to you first, and it is in winter, it is fitting to remove the bone on the 14th day before the full moon when you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this state, so that you hasten to remove the bone on the 7th day, then thus the skin under the bone will be corrupted, and accidents will come as we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the break in the bone comes just next to the covering of the brain, it is fitting that you split the fractured part thus: and that you take the patient's head into your hands, and uncover under the bone in all ways as you can, and on the face of the wound as soft as you can, and if blood comes when uncovering the bone or abscess, or if you help with whatever is necessary, then it is that you fill the wound with moist cloth soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess subsides, and be sure to avoid the occurrence of bleeding; then begin under the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two kinds of work: one way is that you cut straight at the trimming beforehand, and it is like this:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then pour another, more extensive cutting than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have a number of various cuttings, some three-pointed and others long, all of iron, and work lightly so as not to hit the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and thick, so it's fitting that you pierce into it, otherwise, you administer cuttings with saws, not because you will break through the bone at once, but rather so that the point does not pass beyond the softest part of the bone, and has a margin or circle above the point, so that the point doesn't go through beyond the bone; and it's fitting to have more than one, so each one comes in its own time, like the growth of the bone under the saw; and this is the form of the three kinds of saws:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing through the bone when it is broken are that you will set up a tarry (a piece of bone or metal) on top of the bone, and turn to your two hands until you know that the bone has been pierced; then remove the tarry to another place after a little while, and do so all around, then strike at the incisors with the space between the pertus (the points of the bone), and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you retrieve the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have, such as tongs, pincers.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, if there remains something stuck to the bone that has not been freed from the other instruments resembling an incisor, but is more subtle and finer than the others; and if it adheres nothing at all to the small bones or scales, so that the bone can be easily taken away with any instrument; then treat the wound as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of opening is such that the Gauls say, which is more so; and it's said very loudly, and this is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary to uncover a part of the bone, on one side or where the break opens up, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will put below the head of this incision, lens-shaped, because it is this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not strike from one side, and the part is located in both sides, so that the striking is towards the bone; then with a small hammer above, so that you carefully copy the bone all around, and protect yourself well from the cloth that is below; if it is rough against the bone, carefully remove the bone, because you must carefully remove the bone without pain or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone is not pierced through to the fabric, and the bone is merely hit from above, with small pieces, it should cover up that roughness, and remove the scaly skin at a subtle razor that you must have in various quantities, so that each patient has the most comfortable fit, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have many coarse razors, and after that more subtle ones, and do not cease to do this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other small hair-cutting and fracture treatments, it is convenient to adjust according to its intention; and this is a thing that cannot be found in one who has studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the sinew is uncovered, it is convenient to tie off a linen cloth, according to its quantity, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another linen cloth doubled twice or three times, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first one; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not press too hard on the sinew, but only until the wound begins to heal; and leave it for one day or two, until the inflammation is subsided, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, flour of wheat, incense powder, and aromatics, and similar things; and make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer after medicines with mastication; and be careful that the wound is completely healed, so that you do not leave any swelling or assemble any bowels, for when bowels are assembled over the brain cloth, they burst and cause great suffering to the patient; because when something sharp is placed over a wound, it burns from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if no other accidents come to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful and full of doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not happen fire because of the medicine that has been placed on him, which has its virtue, then you should take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and glue one sheet, and put it on the wound; then apply the cure in ways of cures until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two lower bones are broken, or one alone, because they are two bones; and this one is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two bones is broken, it is convenient that you pour your little dough or paste on the bone, and put this break inside your dough index, and in a pouchet because of, until the bone regains its natural shape; do this gently, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the break is above the neck, and it cannot come to rest in its place, then you must put equal to the head of a stick one little bit large.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If the break is in two parts, do it again, and hasten to restore it the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or fifteenth day, when the wound has healed, then wrap the head of the neck with linen cloths, if the break is in a part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	If you put another cloth on the other part, if the break is there; and the cloths be so thick that they fill the holes in the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And said no restorer that "we must moisten the cloths in butter, and move each one every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I don't understand the prompt.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes pour out the blood of an owl in place of poultices, and if it's wrapped around a wound, and kept still, blow air into the patient; then let go what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	If an abscess comes out while you're working on it, apply a dressing of rose oil or cotton soaked in oil and vinegar, or a poultice made from the root.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess does not come out, apply an emplaster made from wheat flour and incense powder mixed with rose oil, then put on light stones, and do not tie the wound; if the fracture is small and it's broken into little pieces, take out what can be extracted, then sew the cut, and treat wounds as needed, and cauterize, just like emplasters and ointments. And if there is no injury inside the abscess, apply poultices, and put in clean gauze, until it's healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	About the cutting of the jawbone.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is cut below and there is no wound to prevent it, and only a clean break without any splitting, whether in flesh or bone, if one notices that it is slightly broken.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right hand side, to put your right index finger into the patient's mouth; and if it is in the left jawbone side, then put your right index finger in your left hand, and put the break inside lightly, and press on the other hand without any further care, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jawbone is split in two, it is necessary that you provide extension of both parts, until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth occur, or a breakage, then tie up with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken mandible coteh (cotton), and put on the double drapel (cloth); and put on the double drapel an estele good made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the mandibule, and tie it up with what you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light viandes.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, if you let it go for three days, and then put back what is changed; and apply plaster on it, with powder of the mill with a lot of water or flour of silk, after you have removed the cotton; and put on the plaster linen light, and if the plaster hardens, and the disposition of the patient does not change, let him be so long until he is healed; many are healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	If there is an abscess on the foot, do so as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If there is a break and wound together, repair no piece of bone if it has been removed; for a subtle method with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, then enlarge it as needed.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have removed all those pieces and there is no remaining bone, then close the wound if it is large; and put on suitable plasters to keep it clean, until he is cured.
de la forcele	of the wrist.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The wrist breaks often in front of the shoulder, and there are three kinds of fractures: or it is broken and separated into two, with pieces, and is lighter to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the wounds are thus when the break is felt at the injury, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder where the force breaks; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then place the break on your two hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there be no appearance or swelling.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have need to stretch more, place a round spear of cloth or linen on the patient's shoulder, so that it is as big as your necessity requires; and extend and lift the skin, and hold tight the spear with your hand, so that you put the break in its proper place.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot treat the head of the swell with caution, because it is coming out in full, then it is fitting that the patient should lie on his hat; and place a cushion under the shoulder, and pour the ministers the shoulder down, until the bone of the swell rises.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then direct the break to your two joints, and if you find that it is fractured, so be it that you cut it; and take out the pieces lightly, and if the bones cannot join for any swelling, so strike at one of the incisions that you have; but put on the force of this instrument, to ward off the syphilitic.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not of wood, and so large as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and has two handles, if you see, and one broad, and the other narrow, just like the routuring of the wound that you made when you cut the bones; and when you are sure about the abscess deep, then close the wound, and if the routuring is small, or you doubt the abscess is deep, then apply the wound with draperies and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess forms on the foot, apply a poultice of melted oil, rose petals, and ash, and place it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The binding of the bone, when it is painful and swollen, is to place the bone on poultice made from flour of the mill and ale yeast, with light cloths above, and fix with nails below if necessary; then take a great bandage of a palm in width, and put a poultice double above the cloths, and then take a small needle three fingers long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the head of the bandage is hanging; place the needle on the break, and turn the bandage over the shoulder, and under the armpit, and under the side of the sick person, and pull from each part, and when you see that the limb holds the break in place immediately, and you see clearly that the needle does not move above the broken bone, then reward one for every day, and when the ligature is set, fix it; and have the patient lie on his back, and under the armpit put a small oil cloth below the shoulder, to lift the support up high; so he will be cured by the tightening of the shoulder or by binding the arm to the neck, in 20 days; then reapply the poultice if you see that it is needed, and fix it and leave it thus, until he is restored; and he is restored in 28 days, and for few people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	From the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It is often that the shoulder breaks or widens when it does not heal through touch; if you arrange according to the shape of the break and its natural form, in all kinds of ways as you can; then put powder from the mill with much oil and light cloths on the patient, and place an iron bar double; then place a large iron rod, slightly larger than the shoulder, and smooth it out over every inch of the shoulder so that the iron rod is evenly smoothed; and then tie it firmly to one end of the bandage, so that the iron rod does not move from its place, and look at the patient each day; and every time he swallows, tighten the bandage, and put the iron rod in its proper place, if it is out of place, and rest the patient on his chest; and the shoulder will heal in XX days or XXV, And when these numbers are completed, you can release him, and be certain, for it is not that he puts on flesh lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	If a piece of bone is protruding and not beneath the surface level, do thus, and lift the skin, and take out the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the abscessed tooth.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the foot.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	But it is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely, and it breaks often without reason.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, so that one side is lower than the other, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of appetite, and swelling, and sometimes vomiting blood, and opening up the veins on the broken bone, and the wound opens well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is done so that the patient lies on his back, and you place a cloth between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the two breastbones with your hands, and subtly put in order all sorts of things until the figure of the bone becomes as it should; then place plaster and poultices over the subtle part of salt, or another lighter substance, and tie it around the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the knot round to the back, and tighten immediately, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it loosens, re-tighten it; and if it is loosened because of corrosion or itching that comes to him, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and untie it, and shave the plaster, and direct the things that are coming back by such cures; then remove the plaster, and tie it again until he becomes healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the broken ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	This breaks only when the ribs are large behind the back, and in the chest area, and they collapse because they are crooked; and it hurts very much at the inquiry of these places.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatments are such that you put equal the break, as it is fitting.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply plaster, and bind with a stick, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the ribs break inward, it causes the patient great pain, and sticking, like of pleurisy, because the bone punctures the membrane; it makes pain, swelling, and vomiting, and a great amount of bloody discharge, and this is a sign of ill health, and the old ones used to put much effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say it should be given foods that swell the belly, to beat down the break in safety.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this unless an abscess has formed on the flesh.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, let it heal.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that you should put bellows on the limb to suck out the flesh, as it seems reasonable; all ways, there is doubt that the bellows does not attract the excesses to the limb by weakness of disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that you should cover the limb with a linen cloth soaked in hot oil, and put towels between the ribs to make the joint even, then treat with the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Instruct the patient if they feel great pain because of a bone that presses on the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is advisable to break open the swollen part of the fractured rib, and it is advisable to put some instrument under it to ward off the abscess; and thus one must dig into the bone, and treat lightly, and then sew the two sides of the wound, if it is large, and cure with plaster, until they are sane.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess comes on the limb, put up moist drapes in olive oil on it, and place the limb; cure while the limb is swollen to the degree that it needs incising, and let it swell more on the rib where it should be, until they are sane.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	There is no break when the bone of the neck breaks, and it does not collapse; and likewise at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens and you see that it will be either cured or not cured, if you prepare yourself to see whether your hands are swollen, inflamed, and dead, and cannot move or stretch, and when you press them with a needle, they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Recognize that it is mortal in more difficult cases, and if they are mute and feel well when you press them and pinch, recognize that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient is cured, provided that someone puts them on treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if such a thing happens at the spine of the back, and you see whether it will be cured or not, if you prepare yourself, if the feet are softened, and if the accident is severe in the hands, and on the back there is great movement and evacuation with a strong desire, and when one gets wind of it upon its belly, it moves with a strong desire.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and wants to get up, then he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Knows that it is mortal if he does not work on his cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this injury did not happen to him, then the condition is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the doctor says that if he has an abscess hot and puts oil of rose or oil of rye flour on it until it is appeased; then puts on a comfortable dressing and bandages with a tie, commands the patient to rest; and does not lie on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone is shattered, it is proper to cover over the wound; and cut off the bone, then put together the two lips of the wound, if they are large, with a seam, then treat the wound with binding linen wrapped around charcoal, until he is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "chiés de la kowe", put your left pocket hand in it, and put it even on the other hand to your power, then put on dressing and splint if necessary; then bind it, and if there is a bone shattered, they make it straight, cut off, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the shinbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the shinbone is fractured, and if it has, then if it was not even slightly alleviated at first; and let it be long, and decline to the padded side; and comes to the patient pain, point, and swelling, as if the break.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you stretch out your hand above, until you are on top of the fracture; and see which way the fracture is and its shape; and if the fracture is only in the head alone, then straighten up this fracture, so long as it returns to its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it inclines inward, then have the patient lie on his stomach, so that the restoration of this fracture becomes apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have straightened it so that it is even, put on the plaster cast, then put on a splint of wood or of horn, and tie up the break, so that it does not move; and apply plaster under the bones, so long as they are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his sound side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes on to the foot, do not touch it, until the abscess is opened and applied to what we have said before; and then come back to restoration, and bind as is necessary, without any further injury; for this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The joints are that which is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder; and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two methods: one being that you take a strip of linen cloth as thick as a middle-sized twig, in this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And let the two thumbs be put on either side of the joint, and point upwards, and sit the patient on one siege; then sit the gaiter over the broken arm on the body, until it comes to its place, and has a bone in the same position, then point up at any heavy thing or the ministers extend it downwards; then put the fingers into the breakage equal to his hands together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is that you sit the patient on their hateryle, and tie the hand to the neck; then command two ministers that one holds what is above the breakage with his hands, and the other holds below all the joints, and extend each of them to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then tighten all the joints below and above the breakage, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	In case of a fracture near the shoulder joint, it is advisable to place one straight band below the bone, and another over the shoulder, below the fracture; and similarly, if the fracture is towards the shoulder, it is advisable to place one lighter band slightly above labor, until the fracture is even on both sides, and on the bone, then set the fracture as needed, and bind so that abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If abscesses come, do not bind them for just 7 days, and place a moist linen in a quiet and oil-soaked basin until the abscess is calmed; then bind, and the manner of binding itself is that you put tallow on the fracture, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and place a bandage, and bind above the shoulder and the arm, so that the arm is in its proper position, unless some thing prevents it, or if the bone is moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bones do not move, then use estesles, and place one larger and stronger than the others on the break, and have two spans of space between each estele, and so that each estele is as big as it passes three spans of each part; then pull tight on the estesles, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	If you see the position of the estesles and the straining, as we have said, in the wound where you restore the injured limb, and you doubt whether there is an abscess swelling inside, if you leave it bound for five days, as we have said; then examine each one of those three days the bond, to see if it prurites or swells, or comes a new swelling on the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it happens, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if such accidents do not happen, then let it be only after three days or more, and the patient lies on his back, with his hands under his stomach; and applies to the affected part one cussin plain of equal flax, and looks at each hour, day or night, whether the figure of the broken limb does not move, or does not loosen the ties; for it will come to him by virtue of medicine, and give him the meat that we have put before him, in a manner so that the meat is first tenderized; and when he begins to recover, if it becomes thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be returned to their place after forty days in full; and therefore, one must dislocate and administer bath and medicine for relief of the pain.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is tight and blocked, so it stays open for one or two days.
de la brisure du bras	of a broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossicle", for because one is small, and that is the one that forms the pouch; and the other is large, and it is below, towards the little bone; by chance only the large fossicle breaks alone, or the small one, and by chance they break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, restoration is light, and healing; and when the large bones are broken, it is poor healing, and they become more grievous than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bone that was broken alone, then they must take care to extend it lightly, and put it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	If it is the large frostbile, then they should stretch it more forcefully; and stretch up to the cussin, and lift the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and move the fingers lower than the others, so that the patient crosses his own hands on him, and the cussin in front of him higher, so that the patient suffers no labor; then extend the minister's some arms to the part below at his hand, or at its tie, and one other minister to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the fingers equal, according to his best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break there are pieces, then put each one in its own place, and if there is no matching joint that can hold its shape, and you cannot restore it to its proper place, then pull out the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	If the wound has an opening, I have mentioned it to the singular surgeon; so take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	If in the beginning of restoration it happens that there are openings (abscesses) in the chest, then apply a cloth made of cerote fat mixed with oil rose and white beeswax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the cloth on top subtly until the abscesses have been calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then apply the cerote, and put on the plaster made of powdered flour with a great amount of fat, until the stitches are set in place, and one is slightly more firm, and a little wider than the others; and observe that it should have six stitches or more in good dispositions: whether the break is in one bone, or two; and pull up tighter above the break than elsewhere, always less when you take away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and so that the dressings on top of the break be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the threads, from which it is strained, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the joint after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accident happens to the member, just like when it pricks and comes into contact with the member, then it is fitting that you apply a warm bath to the member until the prickling stops; and do not let the member be too constricted.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the straining, and when the ligaments are softened and the bone is removed, and it seems so, direct.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you can't get rid of the swelling in the member because it is too constricted, then it is fitting that you soften it a little and let it stay for some time, until the swelling clears up, and then you strain.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things happen to the patient, as we have said, so that he will not be relieved after twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And after that, you tie the hands to his neck, and make sure they are even, and keep them from movement and from twitching, and he lies on his back; and know that this break is restored in thirty days or forty-five, or perhaps twenty days, according to the humors and the constitution of the person.
de la brisure de la main	of a broken hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and in our treatment there has been little bruising, except for pleurisy many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the plantar part of the hand is broken or sprained, if it pleases, the patient should cross his arms and sit straight in front of him equally; then he puts his hand on an outstretched table, and extends the broken bone, and sets the joints equal to each other until they are well fixed; and applies plaster and pads, unless there is an abscess, then he puts a stake according to its quantity; and if it is not inflamed by 10 days of linen bandage.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	In case of a fracture in the finger joint, inside the palm of the hand, do this: make a splint out of cloth and command the patient to wrap it around his broken finger; then tighten the bandage for a long time, so that the nail is as thick as the finger itself, and tighten, if needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the thumb, so that it should be straight and right, then put a splint on top, and another below the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then bind everything around the hand, and tie the ligament between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes from one of the fingers, and it's a thumb, then put an equal dressing on it, as needed; bind with the palm, and if you see, place a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in another finger, such as the index or other, put an equal dressing on it, and tie with the healthy joint that follows; or tie both of them together, until it heals, or put up a splint, as needed; take care in restoring and arranging the abscessed place, and heal who comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	The head of the broken femur
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the broken femur is often fractured and can be seen when it turns in front and behind; and healing like this is as one ties to the above fracture, and to the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patients lean on their face, then stretch each one's limb equally; and this is when the fracture is healed into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the femur, then it has one of the ligaments near the joint, and the others below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, and then so either there are ligaments near the joint, or extension below; then put on the mirels the bone equal to its two hands, as much as is according to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster, and the ligament, so that abscesses do not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it has an abscess, let him calm it afterwards and return to his work and care; the remedy is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap a bandage above the fracture, two or three fingers thick, and hold in place the swelling, then turn the leg until the toes reach the root of the nail, and pour one long thread between the thigh and the knee, tied under, and hang down the heel to the top; then turn up the knee and on the thigh the bandage, then apply plaster to the fracture, and put a stone on the bone of the knee; then put soft draperies between the leg and the knee to equalize the compression, then begin to tie in three turns or four above the fracture; and as you go higher up the fracture, the tighter it will be; then take out with two fingers that thread which you have poured between the thigh and the knee, and put in three stones on top, then return to below to the heel of the foot until you see through the bone; and if the straitening does not move from its place, then let it go, and when it no longer comes with swelling or inflammation or any other appearance.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it happens again, and the dislocation occurs, and address it as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that hold tight, then they must be removed, if one can; and if one cannot, then must break the limb, and pull out the foreign object; and the cure is done as we have said, until it is whole.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no one is broken like this when setting arrows, just as in the shoulder and arm; it all works out in the restoration done so that the patient has no pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is known that the shoulder is restored in three days, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the elbow joint.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	She looks at it and sees a small break, but she bends over many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if she breaks, it is only a crack or a puncture, and she has great pain, and feels it well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is thus: to put equal that which is broken into its two parts, until it is assembled; then apply ointment, and if necessary, put an oval-shaped stone on it; so tie it as it should be tied; then follow all the dispositions that we have mentioned regarding other breaks, as for abscesses and suchlike symptoms; thus put to each one who needs it what you think is required, until they are well.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg break
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	If two bones are in the leg, so that one is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile", and all other fractures occur when it comes to the arm, then the restoration is done equally as the arm, and all the wounds are the same. And if the two bones are broken together, turn the leg from all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fine bones are broken, then turn in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bones are broken, then it feels a great pain, and one sees it well; and turn below.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And then make an extension, and place it equally; but pay attention, if the break is ugly, and there are more pieces, it is better to have the extension smaller and lighter; and fix according to its value.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et when you have completed all your work, so take two firm sticks which prick the inner and outer part of the leg on one side and on the other, and let them be long from the knee to the toes; then bend over them both above and below, and tie with a bandage around the middle, so that the leg cannot move from right to left or from left to right, and thus it is done well; and no one applies short sticks to the length of the leg, and if they do, and tie them on, and put on the stick for holding still movement, and properly made in the break where it has been injured; and move each person every day the leg, to see if there is a seeping abscess or any other accident; and so the doctor until he is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the bone break of the foot.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	There is no break at the ankle, but sometimes there are breaks in the lower leg bones and sometimes there are difficulties. There is no need for more than two kinds of dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a break in the lower leg bones, and you see these bones overlapping one another, so put this patient on their foot on the ground, just as they would walk, and then put now your foot on theirs, where the bone is lifted, press it until they align with their own; then apply plaster and strips, and place a small wooden table on, under the belly of the foot, two wooden pegs fixed, then tighten to the foot in order, and other things that you may have need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, release the bandage, because you will find that the bones are even, either broken, or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	Et s'il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j'ai dit, et l'estrain avenanment; et s'il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantitee, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sur lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu'il le teigne bien.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is to be remembered that you should not forget the other things I have told about other breaks, since we have said them before. And then treat each accident as it seems fitting.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the bone at the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman breaks, if it is set in an enlarged position, then incline it to the back part of the back, and hold it behind; then fill the bag with the nature of the sick person's cotton, and put into it as much as I said; then push down the woman, and lift up her back a little at a little, and thus blow cotton into the nature, until it comes to its opening, and returns to the bone with the cotton; and when she wants to urinate, if the cotton obstructs, and when she has urinated, take it away, and do this seven times or more: then will be restored the break, and you see, take a vessel of wool, and tie it to the puncture a cord, and pour the whole vessel into the nature; then blow through the cord until the vessel is gone in: the nature will return the break; then fill with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, till it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the thumb, or in a woman, is broken, as we have said about the bone of the hazelnut; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from one who examines with study and experience, and senses my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	But this break signifies more deaths on the right path of restoration: then therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the vagina, when it is broken, take an owl's gizzard and swallow it into the vagina; then wrap a cloth around it, and let him stay three days or longer, and he will be cured quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for him who has a break with wound, especially if it is great, as with the bone of the shoulder or of the arm, or similar things, to be cured immediately, so that the cures we have said testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	If the wound is clean, then if it heals again with vitriol, and you have nothing else, then start to restore the break in the same hour, or the next day, unless an abscess forms on your feet.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If an abscess on your feet comes up, then delay the restoration to the next day at noon, until the abscess is healed, and do not touch or apply anything to it for three days or four days, lest you bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the broken bone appears near the heart that is discovered, it is to your advantage to put it at a light touch with your fingers slightly bent.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	If the extension is not fitted for putting equal pressure with your hands, then if it has an iron instrument that is seven or eight fingers long, and the handle is of the size of the wound; and because of this it is the master's task to press three or four, according to what he needs in each wound; and let there be small and a little big, so it does not bend under compression on the limb at your work, and let it be in front, and big from the middle towards in front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", because the curved head needs to be placed on top of the cheekbone; and the cup should be applied once, until it returns, and the one side against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the splints cannot properly grasp the bone, it is necessary to copy the cheekbone itself, so that the splints will have a chance.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you are unable to return the bone as we have said, if you copy it with a suitable instrument, such as a knife or saw, then take what remains in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, you must know that he is not in his natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If it happens so that he is in his own place, then cut off the nail on the finger in wine of vinegar black, and properly clean it; and do not put anything else on the wound except oil, lest it bring rotting and corruption; then administer ointments when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the whole covering with stitches according to the size of the wound, and do well to guard that the wound is not tightened with the break; and many times the foolish healer has done this, and has brought death or rot on the patient one time, or corruption; and so the more gentle and softer restraints than the others breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that more accidents will not occur, as we have said, and if you find pain in the limb, it does not suit to put on stitches; but instead, cover it with hard bandages, and bind it.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two the arrow has been tied up to the wound, so that what you have placed above on wine, and I apply salve for healing wounds, just like perfumed ointment and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is fitting that you loosen the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is softened and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is fitting that the limb be bound in such a way that the arrow falls away lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day it transpires and the limb cannot close but again bends, seeing that there are small pieces of bone, for this reason you should consider applying a poultice to the wound, and remove all these superfluous things that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	If a fistula comes to the leg, or another kind of corruption, it is advisable that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and opens in the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar bones of the great limbs, if you do not treat it, for many times death comes from this, but does not come until he perishes; perhaps he will die after twenty days or thirty, then cure the wound if you can; if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of wounds that come from a fall onto the soft earth
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	These come many times after the health of the fracture, especially when it's near a joint, and one sees the poor figure of the limb; and by chance the limbs cannot do their natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Pren ward donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d'uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l'estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu'il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l'oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu'ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu'ele soit sanee.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	One weak member after the castle
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is restored and stays after the weak members and subtle ones, such things happen: because one of them occurs because he was tied too tightly, and wasn't tied as it should have been; or because there are too many ties, and can't come to the member; or for many arrowings; or for great movements, not in his hour; or because he has little blood in his body, so is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is to make the patient eat, and make his body soft, until there are no more arrows in him; then administer baths, and give joy and delight; afterwards put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great swelling, and often draws out water from it, until the swelling comes to the member; and returns to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	One tortured member after the sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after healing, and the bones are fractured, and the form of the member is deformed, it is useless to attempt its natural movement; nor should you believe false doctors who say one must break the limb anew, for many fools have done this in our land; and such operations are blameworthy, and they bring great harm and even death by chance. Therefore, if the nodations and tortures are fresh, it is best to apply the heat of hot water, or to cook with mellow herbs, such as valerian, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and make the patient take a mollifying treatment, just like quinine does well; and take the muscillaige of valerian, and conflate it with lard or sesame oil, and apply it; or take figs greased, and grind them with fine flour of rye, and similar medicines that calm the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And there are times when the node is removed by constant friction and prolonged rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	and move it every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is old and hardened, like stone, and needs to be set with iron, so that it covers just on top of the bone, at the subtle incision lightly; and apply a cushion and study in the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if you want to now bring back into its place carefully.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For when it is late, if the swelling increases, and by chance it is set back on its place; for this reason you should not move it until it subsides: many times it has come to bring spasm and other pains; at any rate, when it happens, cure the patient, then let him go, as long as the pus is brought down; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then move it lightly, and cure each limb as the cure comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have instructed the chapter on dislocations of the head, at a price.
des mandibules	of the jaw bones.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	But this happens when the jaw bones are dislocated together, and there are two kinds of dislocations: either they are a little osteoporotic in their place, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down towards the chin, and obstruct the saliva from the mouth so it cannot be held back, nor can the lips be closed, and the tongue is blown out with the speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its place through more movements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and completed, it is advisable to reduce it immediately, and do not delay; and in such a manner that the ministers will put the chief of the patient on their knees, and pour a small amount of powder from one of its hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation extends up to two parts; and the other two fingers should be avoided for the purpose of putting it equal; and instruct the patient to release his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he puts it equal, so that it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns with wounds, especially when both jaws are assembled, apply hot water and oil, so that the reduction is done lightly; do not delay to reduce it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, and the mouth of the sick person closes well with softened flesh, so put soft, moist cloths in cerote made of oil and wax upon it; and lightly bind them with melted fat ligaments; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his limbs be between two cushions, so that he does not move neither his right arm nor left arm, nor does he try to force himself to make a fist, but takes light meat, until the pains are gone, and the mandibles are stiffened, and then gently bring what he wants to eat, and do not work on opening the mouth to drink and to burp, until the mandible is well hardened and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be brought to a point in one hour and are not converted to their place, then fever and cough come, and sometimes abdominal pain, and sometimes vomiting of solid food.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see that, then know it's a death sentence; and many have died in seven days.
de la forcelle	of the forearm.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forearm cannot be dislocated along the spine or towards the belly, and is displaced only once by force, and it hurts a great deal.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And restoration is that the patient rises onto his back and stretches out his arms; then presses the wound to the palm of his hand, and it heals; then puts on a plaster and bandage, and tightens it; and the joint that was towards the shoulder cannot be dislocated; unless not, and if it is displaced once, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on a plaster and bandage, and tighten it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus same is restored of the spine when it is set straight.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three kinds of dislocation of the shoulder: one where it slips below the joint, another where it slips under the arm, and occasionally where it pops out above, this happens rarely; it never occurs behind the shoulder or within the joint, and frequently slips below towards the joint, especially in those who have little strength, because they can hardly withstand it; in those who have strong muscles, it slips with more pain, and returns to pain.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some people that they hit or bruise the shoulder so hard that an abscess forms, and they believe it is a dislocation.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore you must examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known about dislocations when it occurs near the axilla, and makes a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their diversity manifest; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and below the axilla at the top of the shoulder, as if it were two; and the patient cannot return his hand to its place, nor move from any movement; and thus, if it is displaced upwards, it is not hidden, because you will find manifestly at the shoulder joint; and this manner of dislocation is not hard to treat when new, or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministers lift up the hand of the sick person above, then put your fingers under the axilla, and lift the joint at force in above towards the healthy shoulder; and the minister lifts up the hand, and extends it upwards, since it has gone down; if this happens suddenly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’ils soient longs et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’ils naissent.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the patient is too light, he will lift with him anything heavy, and dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And another way to fix it is to push a long iron rod into the ground, so that the joint moves just like when one is pressing with one's fist, and is neither too big nor too small; then put on top of the patient, but only if he has relaxed somewhat under the heavy stick; then extend his hand in another direction, forming, and the joint will return to its place immediately; and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, do this cure: take an iron rod from two arms of great length and four fingers of width, which has the head just right for entering into a hole deep under the heel, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Instruct the patient to place the head under the weight of a folded stick, so that it does not break, then put the bone of the patient under the bone; and stretch out both arms above the fist, and fix the aid on the arm, and the hand to the top of the shoulder, then put the arm over the joint of one side, and let the limbs hang down from the other part: the joint is now fixed in its place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done in any way, so that you should put the bone under one side of a sparrow's feather, then put the plaster on paraffin powder with vinegar and beeswax on every part of the shoulder and around, then tighten from under the bone immediately, and turn the bandage onto the plaster, and wrap the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain so.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he be handled little by little, until the limbs are comforted, because he will heal more quickly; and then handle him more after five days or seven, and move him; and if he is firm and not softened, he is cured.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is swollen due to moisture that has occurred, or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterization at three wounds, as he is placed in front of or on the cautery table.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after seven days he still cannot bear up with one arm above it, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are compressed or stretched or softened; and know that the joint can never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that occurs near the elbow and kneecap or at the back, if it is done by force and stretching of hands, and another joint is used to treat it; and care is taken until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes gout in the limb and slow movement, if the patient uses bathing many times, until that gout is relieved, and returns to its first state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of a dislocation with a cut.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is said that the joint of the elbow is dislocated at multiple points, and then it returns; and if it has been dislocated in all directions, both front and back, and dislocations are not cured because they are clearly seen and felt; and each dislocation occurs according to its shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick limb with the healthy one, so you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joined limb is weak, and it cannot move the arm, nor can it touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it so that the abscesses come out when they are alive, for if they came out while it was still inside, it would be more pain to get it out; and by chance it may not be able to be set again at all, especially when it's behind; this is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance one may die.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And if the restoration is done, when it is such that it can be returned to its normal state, then you stretch out both hands towards your two hands; spread his arms and extend his hands so that they are drawn back according to the cut in all directions, upwards and downwards, and put the joint back into its socket or at the root of his palm, until he returns to his place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if there is a dislocation, so that it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and proudly from the base of the palm, which is loosened.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to the place, then perform great extension; and when two ministers extend the arm, and each of them tie up the arm, so that it does not move at extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have stretched a double cloth long and wide; and when the joint moves to join the joint to the hand, grasp any oil for softening the joint, then break the joint, until it returns; and when it is in its place, put on an emplastrure of pure wax with some olive oil, and bind the strain, and bend the arm onto the neck of the sick person, and let it rest for a few days, then set it free.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firm in its place, let go of the ligament, and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not compress well, reapply the plaster and the ligament, and let it be for some days, until it is firmly set; then let it go.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels great pain after the setting of the joint, and it is quiet, then bathe him well and rub him thoroughly, and press until he is relaxed; or you put on the joint a fat mutton shank, then let it be for one day and one night, then take out the bone, and let him enter into the bath; and when he sweats, then rub the joint temperately, then put back the mutton shank, and then enter into the bath; and thus do two or three times until he is cured; and if you see, then apply warm moist fumigation with butter on the strained area, and press thereupon; then it will return to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joints of the hand dislocate, and the return is lighter than the others. Whenever it happens again, you must bring it back to its place immediately, in the same way that it was displaced, so that the joint is swollen or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the remedy is that you put the patient's hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers of the other hand, and straighten the wrist, so that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint. And apply pressure until it returns to normal. Whenever this happens again, you must examine whether it has returned to its place; then put the patient's back on a table at extension and at resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if a dislocation is at the back of the hand, he instructs the patient to place his back against the table, and he places his hand above this appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	But if it returns now, then it is good if the straining of applying poultices calms abscesses and he allows him to resume in that sense.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	But if he cannot suffer it and you cannot put him to bed after some days, the joint will turn and he is hindered from nothing except until his hands are swollen and he cannot strain anything: then know that the nerves have been struck or the arteries; for there is no other remedy except by cauterizing near the case, and perhaps that does not bring any better thing.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hands are at rest, put on the plaster that we have said, then strain it and leave for four days, then remove it and let it be so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	But if it cannot move well and there is no discomfort, put the poultice of hot water and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the joint in the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never have the joint of the hand dislocated on one side, nor on the back of the palm or stomach; so it is straight, and break the dislocation in your pouches as long as it revives, then support the head of the dislocated joint, and turn it towards the part where it is separated; and let it stay for two days, and then set it equal to that day; and do not bind it, if we have said so, and break it off one day, and make it move, and tie the nut; and do this often, as long as it is tight, and just as you did before, if it has dislocated on the stomach of the hand; and do it in the same way, whenever it is dislocated on another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Dislocation of the scapula of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the scapula of the back or neck is dislocated, or multiple ones occur if there is no treatment, because death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the intestines break loose and cannot be held, and many times they become softened any member, or two hands, or both; and often the scapula becomes fixed in four parts; the one that is fixed at the back is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you must treat if the gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no treatment nor healing of the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the old ways of treatment were spoken in great words, with no great gain; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I dis that in the goutiness that comes to the lower part of the foot, no treatment is effective; and also that which comes straight down on two sides, and cannot be cured by fire only if it comes directly to the back, as I said; and it is that the patient should lie on his face equal, with no strain under him, so that he does not bleed; then put one thorn in the head in the earth firm, and another on a pie, and tie a bandage behind the knees of the sick person, and another as hanches, and as genous, and as chevilles; and two servants will take the bandages, one at the head and the other at the pie, among the two thorns; and so they should be well fastened, the thorn as we have said, and the mire puts its palms on the pointed stick firm, until it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if she does not return by this cure, then take a table of three arms long, and chop under the skin, and the patient be on his side, and pour the head of the table under the skin, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and put your hands on the other head of the table, and press well, until he returns to the left; and if you see, do it to the turnip which turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then you put two stakes on the top of the patient’s head with one arm long, and between each stake, and above as well as below, one palm of a long inch space; and in each stake there should be one wound, or the turnip turns, and they are firmly stuck in the ground so that they do not move; between two stakes there should be one turnip, since the turnips that lie together turn, and there are two turnips an inch wide for turning the turnip; and then tie the strap that is between the creaks to the top of the turnip, and the other strap to the feet of the other turnip, and each of the servants makes his turnip turn with all the strain, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	Et quant elle est igalz, si met sur emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, 
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the knee
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Weaves that the joints of the knee and shoulder only come from dislocations, not from other joint issues; and the joint of the knee is displaced in four parts: within and outside, front and rear; and closer to it, and less so in front and rear.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of knee dislocations is that when you join a diseased leg to a healthy one, it becomes longer, and the patient's knees are more exposed than those of the healthy person; and they cannot double their knee movement by fire; and it is the ones who are located near the inflamed abscess, because the head of the dislocated shoulder comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of that which happens to the forelimb, it is that this accident is contrary to what happens behind.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who suffers thus before it happens to him, are that he stands well with his leg according to completion; all see this, do not double bend his knees in pain, and if you want him to walk, he cannot do so beforehand, retains his urine, and swells his groin, and when he goes, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who suffers thus behind it happens to him, are that he cannot expand his knees, nor bend them, and is that leg more twisted than the other, and his groin is softened, and is the head of the crotch at the level below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this resemblance of dislocation, are that if you return to the earlier state of dislocation, and it lingers according to its disposition, if there is no cure; and it is not wise to presume.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And when it comes to dislocations that are fresh, and there are four kinds of dislocation, hasten so you return the joint, and stretch it inwards and forwards, and move the arm on both sides; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, you should wish to have a strong minister, and strengthen the leg with two arms, or bind one of the joints above the knee; and there are other ministers who extend their hand upwards in that manner so they pour water from above onto their legs below, then bind it with a strong rope on the belly; and others tie the head to the joint; and stretch up and down all at once, until the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to four forms, and if dislocation has occurred, as we have said, it is true.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If that is not the case, it is necessary to apply treatment to its form When the dislocation is in the pelvis, it is necessary to lift the patient on his healthy side, then tie him with a strip at the root of the scrotum, and the one below the angle, then stretch the strip upwards towards the angle, and towards the pubic bone; then take hold of other assistants' arms, and embrace the large strip of the sick scrotum, and extend it outwards in form: if it returns to its place now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	If you cannot compress it in the manner we have said, it is necessary to tie the two feet of the sick together with a strong strip on both heels and knees; then let the leg be extended twice as much as the others; then hang them over the chief of a rope, and above the ground two long arms; then command one minister to embrace the head of the scrotum, and let other assistants hang alongside with the sick man, who will form an embrace: for the joint now returns quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at rest, thus givest to the sick, as we have said in the one with the gout, and strangest the limb on the sick person's leg properly, and on the bone also; then put two pins, one on the head and another on the joint, then insert one pin between the joints of the sick person in the shape; and plant moist cloths around it, that he does not bleed, then extend each of these assistants towards him, and place the fingers of his hand equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not return, put on the same kind of bed, as we have said in the one with the gout, and givest to the sick on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when dislocations occur in front of you, it is fitting to stretch the ill limb immediately, and according to what I have said; and place the mirrors on the pain of being above the afflicted joint, then press with your other hand, and extend the arm towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocations are in front of you, it is not fitting to stretch the ill limb afterwards, nor to lift him up from the ground, but rather to make him as he was before being dislocated, just as we have said when coming down on the two hocks; and be on his face, and the ligament extended as we have said previously, and must press firmly on the joint at the table; and it will come to pass that the ill patient extends his legs, and they become even; then add the cauldron, and place the poultice, and the strain of a bandage, so that the hock does not move; and he must rest for three days or four, then he is released, and places on the poultice again; and if you see that they are even, you must apply the same strain as before, and leave him for three days; then release him, and let him walk well, until the members become comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The joint is displaced in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and behind; but not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his knee towards his crotch, and if he does not come back to his original position, it means he is dislocated; and the treatment for all these is that you seat the patient upright, and stretch out his leg if possible, and put your back under his face, and place one foot on top of your feet; then take hold of the joint with your palms, and press between your two hands, then bend both sides of the joint together; and another minister extends his leg, until the joint returns to its place, and the sign is that he has regained a gentle straightening of his knee; and put on the plaster, and heat the knee to the crotch for three days or four, then take it off, and do not work on the patient again until his limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not at all, then strong extension must be administered, as we have said in the treatment of the hare's joint, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the foot dislocation.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The feet are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it bends towards the part where it is dislocated: if treatment is lighter, and it must be stretched lightly with the hands only when it is swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, you should have the patient sit upright, and the ligatures stretched tightly by the leg, above the ankle; then take the foot to your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and pour the foot upwards fully; and do this two times, as we have said, pouring and extracting the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, because it will return; and if it cannot return so, you should make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a strong bandage firmly between his knees, and tie drapery tightly around him, so he does not bleed; then stretch the ligaments, and other ministers extend the foot to his hands or to the binding, where it is tied above the neck of the foot; then stretch each minister equally, and the bandage be placed between the knees of the patient to hold the patient when you extend it; then put the mires equal to the dislocation in his hands, and other ministers stretch the healthy leg downwards, and the dislocation will return soon.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When it comes to a point, so he puts the plaster and poultice on, and the wound forms, and binds the foot to the leg, and watches carefully which nerves are above the ankle joint, that they do not become too tight; then let him be off two days or three, and if the bond is loosened, remove it; then let him take his leave after four days; and if he goes before that time, it is not surety that he will still dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes up on the foot, it is advisable to treat it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is cured.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, it is advisable to stretch them properly with work, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	In case of dislocation at no other place on the back or foot, it is advisable to seat the patient on a level plane or on the bed straight, and put your foot under what appears from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it stops moving; and when it is aligned, and there is nothing open, put under the heel of the foot a table for two fingers, then apply pressure again, and let it rest three days, then release it; and make him rest, until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When wounds come with dislocation, and you try to restore it, many times the patients die; do not be presumptuous in your treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and unless you are pitiful, merciful, and patient; and do not harden. Use soothing remedies at first to treat abscesses, and let the patient be in God's hands, if you do not see any hope of recovery; and when you see hope, now restore the limb as it comes alive; and when the limb is restored, administer soothing remedies again, and cure the wound as it seems fitting, with ointments for dry wounds; and if there is a break with fractured bones, and small bones are exposed, set the bones, and do what we have said about simple diseases; and beware of entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will cost you nothing but according to your Creator, and for the wisdom that has armed you and your body.
Amen	Amen.
