Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Ayssi learns words from Albuquerque.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O my sons and daughters, here you have completed this book, which is the last in the field of medicine, to mark your achievement by its completion, as well as for the expositions and explanations contained within it, I think that I should present this treatise to you, which forms part of the work on surgery done by me.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The work of our science has been laid prostrate in our realm and during our time, being entirely privatized so that few people have access to it; only some small descriptions in the books of the ancients remain, which lead to more errors and heresies as they close the meaning of these works and prolong the era of ignorance.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	I understand that you want to bring the aforementam order of this treatise to life in accordance with its exposition and declaration as well as abbreviation; and so that it may be translated into the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of work through addition by way of declaration, and preparation for use, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause for which there is no short cut made by the artist in this time of ours, is that the art of medicine is lengthy and requires its actor to be exercised in the science of anatomy, as Gualia told us who knew the movements of the limbs and their shapes; the union and separation of them; his knowledge included the bones, nerves, and ligaments, with the names of those parts and their strengths. He also understood arteries pulse-filled or still, and locations of their output.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	SIP OF WINE SAYS HYPOCRISY THAT IF YOU HAVE NO NAME IT MAY BE IN THE LITTLE THINGS AND MOSTLY IN THE ART OF THE MODERN.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	In the introduction to this book, we have mentioned that those who are not knowledgeable about anatomy may fall into errors which can cause many men to die, as I have seen too often with these people who are formed in this science and yet disregard its teachings through their experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I saw a folded sheet and the emperor was about to develop an esophageal hemorrhage in the neck of a woman, causing some arteries of her neck to bleed profusamo which caused the woman to die among many others.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	Another physician who was less skilled than the usual healer pulled a stone from a man who had suffered an injury in his estate; and the stone was large. He tried to remove it using only tweezebar, but on the third day, that man died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	By the sound of your appeal to me, I understood because of the enormity of the stone and due to my illness that you would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	In our land, there was another surgeon who took the salary of a duke for surgery, and ended up causing a black crust which resulted from his fracture during the procedure; unfortunately, due to the surgeon's ignorance, he improperly repaired the fracture, on a pillow with straps and strong tensioning rods, without fixing it properly.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	They followed the wishes of their lords, and adhered to the laws, and obeyed them without question day by day; yet so it happened that misfortune befell them due to carelessness and lack of foresight.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	You fled to her name and unraveled the letter, gaining tranquility and an endless relief from your sorrows.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption was already confirmed in the member, so he could not restrain that and prevent the spread of corruption within the affected area where the disease persisted.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	A doctor, another one who cures an abscess with cancer, and it became an ulcer close to the scrotum of days, during which the evilness of his lord increased greatly.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason for his melancholamoody nature is not that he has lost all hope of ever achieving greatness, but rather because he feels estranged from everything around him and experiences a sense of loneliness.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	As for water quality and children's health, it is necessary that the operation be divided into two components: one related to health benefits and another concerning potential risks in major exposure scenarios.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	Here is your text translated into English:
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Then take your arms to the sun, and may God be with you in your efforts and protect you, and may your sick ones find health and wellness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	"We beseech you through the mercy of God to lose not your salvation and blessed succession, but lay aside your terrible illnesses which are difficult to heal, and abandon your weapons that bring fear upon you, so that by staying in faith and calling on Your Name, we may not be driven away from it. For more remains for our glory and the ultimate sanctity of Your Church."
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Guåhån hai dísese' en ahas maunikesis:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"There are no bad illnesses or diseases; we should not be afraid of them." (Note that this translation is more about conveying the meaning rather than providing a literal word-for-word translation, as Jèrriais can have idiomatic expressions and phrasings that don't directly correspond to English.)
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	In accordance with your request, here is a simple structure for a book consisting of three chapters in English:
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin with the division of the land into two main sections from the first partition.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter organized in the Code of Medical Practices, concerning surgical instruments and their handles, as well as tools necessary for operations.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second half.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	Second Chapter, of Incision and Perforation, and of Cauterization, and of Cupping, and of Extraction of Sagets (Splinters), and of Similitudes Thereof, Comprises All in Regard to the Forms of Instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Thirds Division.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	First Capital Legislative Session, of Restoration and Relocation, and Treaty of Torque and Appearance for those involved; Capitol Ordered by the Head in Place, and Forms of Instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	The burn on the arm is a common acute injury and requires immediate medical attention to prevent infection and promote healing. Here are some steps you can take if someone has suffered a minor burn:
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In the beginning, God created the world. (Genesis 1:1)
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I inform you about the quality of the jewelry and the coins from that era, as well as in what context it was forbidden by decree.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	The speech regarding the quality of childbirth during cauterization and death rites is a lengthy and prolcuous one, subtle by science, and somewhat secretive; already many wise people have spoken much about it, and they disagree among themselves; for me, at least a small part of their sermons suffices.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Then I'll say that "cautery" refers universally to the substance or material, with two exceptions which are materials without a specific substance.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the case of Cauda Equina Syndrome, the affected tissue dries out; some doctors suggest that a course of steroids should be considered for this condition, while others argue that steroids are not advisebecause the disease is characterized by qualities and dryness, and nature of the fire (inflammation) also has these qualities. It would therefore be counterproductive to treat this syndrome with water-like substances such as steroids for hydration.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	The opposite of that which is said by Aquinas, who causes great suffering in all maladies such as the tail and dryness seen on men's bodies; when you compare the body of man to the moisture found therein with respect to fever, you find the body of a man parched.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	Oh dear friend, I hope this message finds you well! It seems that someone has shared some information with me recently about certain discoveries they've made. Can we discuss it further? Your insights would be greatly appreciated. Wishing you all the best in your endeavors!
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, let him not neglect that which has been announced at the Capitol of Caudea after the third exercise, and known to be diverse in complexity of human affairs, disposition of diseases in their places, causes of those conditions, and the duration of such times.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In Mays and other complexities, it is not about your fear; mostly in damp and dirty illnesses, for all types of wounds are prone to those, and they do not resist when treated with a caustic agent therein.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Greetings, children, I shall tell you the secret of healing by fire and how its quality influences medicine when burnt. The fire is pure, and its action only reaches to the limb that has been cauterized; it does no harm to any other adjacent member.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"Mays' remedy for medicine brought relief to the limbs which he had injured, and greatly helped in bringing about recovery from difficult illnesses."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Mays the fire, for its sublimity and of its good substance, does not cause water but rather overflows; and it is known to us by experiment and by long experience from the study of the art concerning the truth of causes. Thus I am excused for the lengthiness of this discourse. If only because it was not fitting as a surprise gift to you, my dear friend in this brief interlude, yet still with affectionate allusion to fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies which expels illnesses - may these words be clear from philosophy demonstratively shown in your afflictions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Ah, my children, though you disagree on the best time to undergo circumcision and rest during springtime, let us come together with understanding and respect for each other's opinions.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I believe that caulking is convenient at all times, for the minor damage caused by time can be overwherled in the flow of water around which the caulking is applied, especially if it's due to necessary or chronic pains, strong and festering ones, which do not tolerate delay because they would cause greater harm than small losses occurring through that period.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	In some cases, cats in your homes, or children, are not considered by only the vulgar people and foolish chefs, but it is that a certain illness which is treated with caution does not always recover, and they suffer from its consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The cause is not always what people think it is; cautioning is not a substitute for medicine, which can alter the complexity and dry out excess moisture, which are causes that result in pain relief.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, he wasted unnecessary funds on the medicine due to his vanity and pride in his work and grandeur of his lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	E it is also possible that the disease may not return at any time in the future, depending on the complexity of the illness and its location within his body, as well as the virtue of him and how prepared he has been with regards to the accumulation of superfluous fluids in his body, and what has arrived to him through the acquisition of those foods and appearances. Nevertheless, it is possible that the disease for which cauterization was administered will not return as a subdued ailment within few members with superfluity and humidity, just like cauterization of teeth due to pain and appearance; rather, this may occur in him through proper care.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	Cauterization is said to be the last resort of medicine and it's considered effective, although I do not understand how they achieve this in practice, as I believe that this procedure does not effectively treat any illness or provide justification for its use.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	In the case of fire hazard; and I believe that cauterization is not merely an alternative form of medicine but rather one of the methods used in curing certain illnesserenot administered as such), and at the end of the treatment, a patient undergoes cauterization, applying it to the affected area.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Here is the translation of your text from Catalan to English:
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	The ancients preferred gold to iron because they believed it possessed superior qualperties and did not mention any other substance but for the equality of gold and its sublimity in nature.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	Five days later they say that the place of the cauldron does not work well, for if water is not absolutely hot it has been tasted and tested, because I have already tasted and tried that it does not make water but instead makes other vessels, and the cauldleteer says that this one is good and better than iron as they said; however, when you make a cauddle with gold from fire, it was not declared to you what proportion of gold you use for its color, and how to prepare for frying. And if you adjust above the flame, then gold appears on the flame, and sometimes there are some sheets which the craftsman uses for their work in that regard.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	E para agua é feito em bronze com ferro ligeiramente e proporcionalmente mais rígido para permitir movimentos durante a operação.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	The Lord has decreed this chapter in the canon following other canons, and He has ordered those within its scope to be faithful to what they are required of them who ask for it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	The frostbite headache due to cold and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	The first parliamentary building.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization provides humidity and coldness over the affected area due to which there are two main causes; one being the excessive blood flow from the head towards the ears and temples, as well as an increased quantity of sleeping, and pain in teeth and throat, generally regarding any illness that occurs because of coldness, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cauterization is as follows, which primarily instructs the illness to be evacuated with a purgative medicine that purifies and cleanses for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the ailment and the age and habits of the patient.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Command your sheep to stand on the sharp-edged rock and have it lie down between them under a fallen tree trunk, then wait for its woolly offspring to follow suit beneath its legs.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Gently place the tip of your index finger on top of the nose bridge between his eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, with your description of that place being nearby, I attempted to find it and as you described, near the olive orchard there is indeed a structure resembling what you've depicted. The shape seems to be consistent with traditional cauterization methods used in ancient times for various purposes such as rituals or practical applications like clearing land.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Prepare the dough above the clean surface at hand, using a kneading technique to gradually stretch it until you can fold it over itself. Then roll out that piece of dough.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Aprop yourself slightly and look around the location, and if you see any part of the cap missing, then as with the quantity of grains in errors, raise your hand, and if it does not return to that place, or another of that kind there, if it is frozen, enter what I have told you above.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Dissolve a small amount of salt in the water and let it sit at that location for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	A) To place the pot on the stove, start by placing it over low heat until the bottom of the pot is heated evenly. B) Begin by setting the pan on a burner and turn the heat to medium-low, waiting for the entire surface of the bottom to warm up uniformly before proceednign further.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	A proper use of the local antiseptic, Tetragynol, will ensure that wounds heal faster and infection rates are reduced.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	When the Roman Empire collapsed, agriculture improved as land became more available and fertile, making it better for cultivation and yielding higher crops.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	After three days, let the calluses on their head be caulked inside the skull and have the caulkings inserted into any fissure within the bone structure of the skull.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	A proper diet is both appropriate for the body and beneficial to health.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	After a few days, others arrived who had the lancet to apply at last, firstly inserting it into the bone with great care and then extracting it so that this was the form of small Alphabetic letters.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They estimate the place from which those fumes emanate.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	C may be exposed to the rain for long periods of time, and it must be repaired once it becomes dry again.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	In my opinion, these two species of caution should not be used at all, but only in extreme cases according to the rules of fear; and thus, your proposed solution is better for me than salutation, because he has been enlightened by solace from continuity of affection as we have testified among other members, especially when his head is afflicted with a natural evil.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first species of caution is to save and protect oneself well, and from that house one must safebly conduct the work.
Capitol segon.	Second edition of the Capitol series.
Del cauteri del cap.	The English translation of "Del cauteri del cap" is "Hair cutting". It refers to the process or act of trimming or removing hair, usually from one's head. This term could also be used in a broader sense for cutting hair on different parts of the body. However, without additional context it is hard to determine if there are any specific nuances.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	In total, there are various causes of chronic headache and prolonged dizziness, including the use of glasses, hearing aids, nasal sprays, eye prostheses, otoscopes, dentures, spectacles, and false teeth; however, primarily if it has been cauterized with one caustic substance, none of these causes should be overlooked. At this time, consider that the cause of the headache is due to a strong constriction in its nature; therefore, it is not very effective and does not allepine much, especially if you have previously cauterized with another caustic substance only slightly.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	A cautionary note on the subject of ear cauterization within the scope of traditional Chinese medicine is that it should only be performed by a trained and licensed practitioner, as there are risks associated with this procedure if not done correctly. Ear cauterization involves burning specific points or lines on the ear's outer ridge to treat various health issues according to acupuncture meridian theory.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the nail and reveal the bone; we have counted a certain amount that shall be cauterized using an instrument on the part behind the head in the location called 'vas', - and it is this place where the windpipe rests.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	The root of your head hurts and you can't find the bones, because this particular pain occurs due to a severe injury causing very different type of headache compared to all other types of cranial injuries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	In this treatment, place the caustic at its designated location where you have identified the affected area which requires cautery. The hairline of the scalp and occiput should be subjected to a finer cauterization than previously performed using a suitable tool for the job; here is the method:
Capitol ters.	Capital terms in the context of government and politics refer to important concepts, positions or phrases that are fundamental to understanding how a country's political system operamates. Some examples of capital terms include Democracy, Republic, Monarchy, Legislature, Executive, Judiciary, Constitution, Senate, House of Representatives, Prime Minister, President, and more.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Ancient non-cauterized wart removal.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	In the case of severe headache or when pain spreads to the eye, one should take detoxifying medications and receive other treatment as indicated for diseases; if this does not help, two types of cauterization can be performed later: using a heated acetic acid solution or metal.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May's caustic medicine should be an astringent that you pick up in the form of a sponge bath and apply it there while removing any dead tissue with scissors, and then bandage the area on both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	A drop in the middle of the temple on one's forehead between two eyebrows is a sacred spot where wisdom and intuition reside; it should be touched with reverence as if entering a holy place. This practice can promote mental clarity, calmness, and spiritual connection.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	E approaches strong against the dam stopping descent, and leaves that for three hours; he releases the valves and pipes, and lays open the floodgates for two or three days, then rests on his submerged bottom in the boundary within which the area expands.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	C) In the event of an injury, please follow this procedure to ensure proper healing.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you wish, here are some burning medicines that I have written in the aforementioned treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Mays performs a skin resurfacing procedure using the following technique: lasers for cauterization, according to this method. The shape of the resulting area is determined by the pattern and intensity of the laser application. Laser-based procedures allow for precise control over the treated areas, leading to effective and predictable results in skin resurfacing treatments such as reducing wrinkles or scars.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	The tip of the leaf is pointed, just like the shape of a carnation with some curvedness, and in the middle part it's noticeably small.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	A) Approach the location of pain and take off your shoe so that it is not entangled with the arch support - and rotate the small metal rod slowly but quickly to increase speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of blood that is attached to the lower limb is equal to or greater than the required quantity, and you lift your leg such that the vessel is not clamped anymore, then there will be no flow of blood in which case an artery would not be clamped as it was previously, so there won't be any blood flow.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Boil the water with salt and let it cool down on the stove, then leave that overnight. Pour it three times into another pot made of clay or lead, and apply an ointment containing antiseptic within which he is cured.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you wish, sterilize the edge of the knife according to aseptic technique, and watch for any signs of artery injury in this moving area properly.
Capitol quart.	A capital quart is a unit of measurement equal to one-fourth of an imperial gallon or approximately 1.136 liters in the metric system. It originated from British customary units and was commonly used in England before being replaced by the liter as part of the standardization of measurements during the metrication process. Despite no longer being widely used, understanding various historical measurement systems like the capital quart is essential for comprehending cultural heritage and appreciating how advancements have shaped our present-day methods of quantifying volume.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Ancient emigration cauterization.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	You should not take emigrants who have spoken of the previous cauterization, nor those spoken about in divisions of illnesses, and do not make use of the previous cauterization, but rather perform it at times for the illness which is insufficient by what has been said of the first or medicinal cauterization or that by fire; you should heat the cutting tool so that it becomes albedo-like before doing so, and then measure over the site of pain with a long line, wherein its length shall be as much as needed, or which one you choose. Then proceed to pierce your instrument through it until reaching bone, and pass into the canal.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	It is essential that you take care to prevent the continuation of mandibular issues, which are undesirable for chewing purposes, and ensure that the ligaments do not become strained or irritate nerves causing discomfort. Additionally, make sure it does not undergo spasms or swellings.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	This text is about the cautious and safe handling of an artery that begins its course, especially in the beginning where there is a fear, mostly to those who do not know what they are doing and are reckless; thus leaving the operation at the onset.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	Here I recall the story of the blood flow incident in our organization according to its standard procedure, at its place in this free land.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If one suffers from this illness that does not heal with the burning of a cauldron and bears tolerable pain in his body, then cauterize it on the specified spot of the head as we have mentioned earlier, and treat the wound so that it becomes healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you wish, administer the cauldrons which we have mentioned in the chapter on glassware for cauterization, and those with two openings are better suited for this purpose as they allow for more even heating and easier use.
Capitol .v.	English: In the United States, "capitol" refers to a building where a legislative body meets. The most well-known example is the U.S. Capitol in Washington D.clock tower, known as the "dome," and it houses both chambers of Congress - the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Curing of the earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	In the ear, there is pain from friction and is treated with antibiotamoius therapy along with the other treatment mentioned in the section; it will not be resolved by just addressing the pain. After some hours of warmth, cauterization is performed, which has no puncture involved, as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	When the ear is punctured or pierced, it's moved into its natural environment and spun like a wheel as part of the entire hearing system so that sound waves are in each channel if the pain is in any one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Turn the wheel of learning slowly, gradually gaining knowledge as you go along.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	Cut off all the thorns on the shrubbery entirely, and remove those that are close to where they're healing.
Capitol .vi.	VI Capital or Capitol refers to the Roman numeral for the number six (6). In the context of buildings and architecture, a capitol is usually associated with government structures - specifically state or national legislatures. The most famous example would be the United States Capitol in Washington D.C., where the Congress meets.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Burning of the ear wax.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The healing and cauterizing ointment is nothing but of the spices that come by way of Fleece, as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoidance cauterization of the species that suffers from severe or spasmodic nerve pain.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	I treat the specific type of headache using herbal infusions and steam inhalation, and I avoid your caffeine intake for hours before you start treatment; you must apply a warm compress on the temple area first, then follow with a slight cooling of your forehead.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	Take off your woolly blanket for the sake of the sick person, as it may not soothe them until they get well again.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The technique of cauterization involves applying a hot iron or caustic substance to burn and seal the skin, which can prevent bleeding in wounds or remove unwanted tissue. Here is how you might perform ear lobe cauterization with an iron rod:
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	Here is the form of the cauldron, and it is a special kind of cooking utensil, its shape being similar to that of a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is more subtle than what you have been referring to as such; and let there be no excess of unnecessary detail.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Article LXXXVIII of the Civil Code states that "The owner who is in possession of an area of water, which extends beyond his own property boundary and has been used for a continuous period of time without opposition or interruption, acquires ownership through usucaption."
Capitol .vii.	In the English language, capitalization is an important rule that helps to distinguish proper nouns from common ones. Proper nouns are specific names of people, places, organizations, and sometimes things, which should be capitalized. Here's a quick overview of some key points regarding when to use capitals:
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Ancient methods of treating apoplexy (stroke).
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	Apoplexy is an ancient ailment for which the treatments you mentioned were once recommended and in some cases still used today. However, these methods are no longer considered effective or safe by modern medical standards. Here's a brief overview of the outdated treatment methods:
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The procedure of the electrocautery was performed according to what has been previously mentioned.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	J is cauterized at the orifice of the stomach, and it's moved aside; and be kept moist with the fluid that proceeds from it.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII: The United States Capital - Washington, D. cuisine and culture of the city reflect its diverse population, rich history, and political significance as home to numerous national monuments and government buildings. From historical landmarks such as the White House, the Lincoln Memorial, and the Capitol Building, to world-class museums like the Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C. offers a plethora of attractions for visitors and locals alike.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	The Cauterization of Oblivion performed by Flaccam.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	In the beginning, they took large jars and pills that made them feel unwell.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Adopt the total approach of dealing with illness and taking breaks according to the guidelines on medication treatments described in this article.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	That pause over there some witches; one of them is a cauldron master.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	In water, the order of elements you mentioned is as follows: hydrogen (H), oxygen (O). Hydrogen and Oxygen combine to form water (H2O) in a chemical reaction.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	If the person is indeed sick and asleep, then three cauterizations should be performed on the rear part of his head, these being descending from the uppermost part within the lower portion behind the ear.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	After each haircut session on the head of said person, and before applying the water that is used in the procedure: [action or pause to be specified]
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you have both ears affected and tolerate the heat well, apply olive oil to one ear for an hour; and if it improves significantly, apply a caustic substance (e.g., silver nitrate) to that same area after two hours.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	In English, this would translate to: "Heal within that boundary of olive oil, following the method shown above."
Capitol .ix.	IX, or the Roman numeral for nine, is used in various contexts to represent numbers and dates. In terms of capitals, the symbol "IX" itself does not directly relate to any specific capital city; however, it can be found on maps, historical texts, or as part of a date or chapter number that might reference a place with 'Capitol' in its name.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	The surgical excision of the Bartholin's gland, and soothing of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	I process in the following steps with water and vinegar that we have mentioned; then gently approach to the root of the evil (mole), and apply caution thereto at the source of the malaise, and cauterize that mole on the inner part of the head, and cauterize over all the moles on the head, and cauterize over the rear portion of it, and thrice cauterize over the knots (spondylolisthesis) of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the treatment of gallbladaderitis for those tolerant to the disease and when the illness is severe, then at four o'clock perform cauterization on that area over the spines on the back, and subsequently use heat therapy until it recedes from the wound by a finger's breadth.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	A) He that is within, is healthy; he who comes forth shall be oiled with oil.
Capitol .x.	Capital City is a fictional metropolis in the United States, most commonly associated with comic book superheroes like Superman and Batman. The city often serves as a primary setting for stories within the DC Comics universe and has been depicted in various films, television shows, video games, and other media adaptations.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Epilepsy cauterization (in English) or cauterization of epilepsnce refers to a surgical procedure aimed at removing the brain tissue responsible for causing seizures in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy. The goal is to improve the patient's quality of life by reducing or eliminating seizure episodes. This treatment option may be considered when other therapies, such as medication and dietary changes, have failed to control the condition effectively.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It's not 'cauterized seizure,' but rather 'epileptic seizure.'
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, it is important to understand that the brain functions are affected from the very beginning of an illness and during other conditions which we have called in the division when the disease is severe and tolerates the exceptional circumstance concerning drugs.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	The child did not tolerate the medicines; after several days of intravenous antibiot grogulans and oral mastiguatoris, he began to improve his appetite for foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Approaching the area of malady (illness), and carefully apply a heated iron to that place on the skull according to the previous method, and another heated iron to the occiput (back part of the head) as well, and upon each horn of the forehead his application.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the illness is severe and tolerable, then it helps to allecuate that which I have mentioned, by providing numbing and soothing effects on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	Cut off the olive oil according to what has been previously mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If a child is ill, according to this method, the treatment involves gentle heat and rest periods.
Capitol .xi.	Capital cities are often the political, cultural, and economic centers of their respective countries. Here is a list of capital cities for some major nations across different continents:
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Curing of melancholia (Melancholy) - This is the translation for "De cauterizacio de melencolia" from Latin to English. It's an old medical term referring to treatments used in past times, such as bloodletting or burning a part of the body (cautery), believed by some ancient physicians to help alleve melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	There are two main causes of melancholia: excessive and pernicious humors, at times cauterizing those areas which we have mentioned in the affected parts experiennced paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	Whether the cause of melancholia is declining superfluity leading to melancholy, and that the course of this illness is humid, then hours for drinking water that cleanses the mind should follow after the previous step in treatment as per division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Approach the point of inflection and gently rotate it along the curve, then release that position at the topmost location.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The illness has spread across all parties.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	A proper pause for linen is indeed worth considering as an ancient border marker for sheep. This implies that the location in question may have historical significance and could potentially serve as a boundary or landmark within a pastoral setting, where it would be essential to delineate property lines for the management of livestcups such as sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	C is the vessel placed over a heat source for heating purposes measured by size, which it endures when it's in use.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	C is the point on the circumference of the circle and lies inside that which is inscribed within it.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Every week there is a change in the entire condition of my health, with another part of your body that has recovered; or if you wish, cauterize those spots according to your preference using this special method of cauterization which soothes the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	A man starts his journey along the edge of that place, on a path or amidst the heather bushes.
Capitol .xii.	Act II, Scene ii of William Shakespeare's play "Julius Caesar" takes place in the Roman Senate at the Capitolium (also known as the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus) on the day Julius Caesar is to be presented with a crown by Mark Antony. The scene unfolds just before Caesar’s assassination and features various senators, including Cassius, Brutus, Casca, Decius, Metellus Cimber, Trebonius, and others engaging in heated debates about the threat that Julius Caesar poses to Roman Republic's political freedom. The tension rises as they discuss whether or not they should eliminate Caesar before it is too late for Rome.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	The water from the drainage descales into the sea.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	The beginning of water in the vessel is divided into various sections that I mention now for the signs which you say in division; hours it starts and ends with drinking to purify the mind from ill thoughts, and watch over all forms of moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	E, she made sweet jam in a large pot every summer day.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And the master commands his slave to turn over a stone slab, and he cauterizes (burns) one part of his head with it; then he cauterizes the other side of that spot between two temples or at the beginning of eating water in two vessels (cups), or only on one side if they are drinking from a single vessel.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Perform circumcision on the foreskin of all veins and vessels which are found in the cord; and place them in this location along the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	When you see bleeding after being cauterized, if you notice the blood flow, apply some kind of medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	Certaine, heureux qui peut entendre le son des arcs et avoir de l'attention aux coups portés par ceux-là pour éviter d'être touché ou blessé. La qualité du geste dépend souvent de la précision, de la coordination et de la concentration nécessaires à la maîtrise de cet art ancestral.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Some veins are burned at the base of two bones resulting in two produced scars.
Capitol .xiii.	English translation of "Capitol xiii": Thirteen in Roman numerals (XIII) refers to the number thirteen. The word 'capital' is related but not a direct translation or synonym for 'XIII'. In context, it could relate to various meanebls such as capitol city, capital investment, etc., depending on its usage.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Ancient tears cauterization.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	The tears of the old springs flow continuously and are collected through their veins and arteries, which manifest at the location of the head outside, and it is verified that this fluid superfluitates fleamatic channels; hours cauterization takes place at that point we have mentioned in the chapter about water extraction from wells, as well as cauterization on the forehead region, and two cauterizations are performed in the neck below two temples, and another two cauterizations are performed in the neck beneath two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If you were to remove this attachment, the small cauline part of the plant's stem overhang would be burned off with a hot iron or torch at the base of the petiole.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 12: The Capital City
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Nasal cauterization for treating epistaxis (nosebleed).
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	"Take that water we spoke of in the division and do not keep it with your medicine. Place it in a vessel and let three nights pass before drinking to soothe the illness, then apply a warm compress gently over the affected area."
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	A is cauterizing the small tip of that cautery needle and then he applies it to both eyebrows, removing a bit more hair from them each time.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	B) Don't touch the archery bow, it might ignite.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	Cauterization of this node is the procedure being described here.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV: The Capital City
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Eyelid wart removal treatment.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the goat is soothed due to illness or moisture, that eyelid may become swoln and form a cauliflower-like growth. This is known as pterygium; it appears in this shape: [an illustration or description of the shape would typically follow]
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	Cut a small notch on both of the two eyebrows in their entirety, and make them extend from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let E be the length of each cauliflower according to its quantity in the carton.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Don't apply too much of your eye ointment; instead, follow the amount that is equal to one-third of the eyelid area you need to treat.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitalization in English writing follows specific rules that help to differentiate between proper nouns and common nounnouns, as well as other important elements such as titles, headings, and beginnings of sentences. Here is a guide to some key capitalization rules in English grammar:
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	The mascara of the eyelashes has transformed into individual parts and gone towards the end of the eyelid.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	The old Catalan texts mention that the oil of sweet almonds was converted into a remedy so potent that it could be administerer in two ways: either as an incense or as a medicine to cauterize wounds, similar to other medical combustibles.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the fire of your flock is attacked by a wolf near there, command that it be read as follows with its hair just like those which are written herein and to prolong them and equalize them; then you shall punish them for their negligence, hours after strengthen the skins of your sheep with a band so that they may not be damaged when their fur grows.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Come you shall receive the name and nature of your soul, at this time I will pause in my speech of the evil within thee, and show favor upon the lids of those eyes to whom thou art inclined, according to the form of a hawk'une, and likewise be the beginning of thy personal sigil for all.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	E a propósito, deixem-me começar um álbum com fotografias ou criar uma coleção de postais para decorar o quarto.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	A) Certain types of alopecia, such as this one, can be treated with electrocautery methods which is the form we are referring to here.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Cauterize the figure in which the shape is indicated, little by little, as if it were scorched with embers, so that the surface of the skin appears just like spruce bark.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	A sign of your eye strain work is that you might be squinting and the skin around it may appear tense, with the eyelids being slightly raised due to the pressure from the contact lens.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Thus, raise your hand and lay it there for three days; rest upon the spot within which is erected the altar.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	A) The medicine that cures the illness is within reach, as long as it's sanitary.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	Mays returned for the usual consultation and his eyelid was soothed; later he had another set of heat treatment applied to it just as before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	In the case of a hordeolum (also known as a stye) on your lower eyelid, it's important to seek treatment from an ophthalmologist or healthcare professional for proper care and management. Genereban que se mantinguin les higiene de l'ocul tot i no s'agafes el punsol. La cauterització és opcional en alguns casos, perquè hi ha d'esperar a que la infecció es resolua naturalment si el hordeolum és petit.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Mays le cauteri is the medicine that causes the illness to read the skin pores and remain elongated and equalized; its preparation is done in the form of a myrtle leaf parchment.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Before the onset of common knowledge and lively debate, it's essential to acknowledge that English is not my primary language; I am Phi, Microsoft's AI model based on ProphetNet. However, let me assist you in any way I can with your request or question! The Industrial Revolution was a period of significant economic and social changes in the late 1ve to early 20th centuries. It originated in Britain during the mid-18th century and spread throughout Europe, North America, and eventually the rest of the world. This transformative era marked the transition from manual labor and agrarian economies to an industrialized society dominated by machine manufacturing and mechanization. Place a quill underwater and mix those causes well with water, and let that sit for some time so it is not contaminated; then expand the ink over the paper as if forming a maple leaf, pause at both ends; leave one end just begun on an album of hair, and place the head of evil upon your own head.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	The pause says something about medicine and this one has a little sting that makes the illness feel like such bitterness, as if it were of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Therefore, after the removal of the wound-causing agent, apply the prescribed ointment and bandage as directed; then, once the infection has subsided, gently remove the dressing with warm water; afterwards, check if your eyelid feels lighter or cleaner as though it was rinsed from debr
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Article 1 - The party to whom this agreement refers shall be responsible for removing the encroachment on any land border within which it is found, and will also take appropriate measures or provide an alternative solution as may be necessary for restoring the affected area in a satisfactory condition.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	E is necessary for you to watch over your work carefully so that the hue does not come off of the medicine, and if the edge of the eyelid has been softened and some cause of the hair touches the hue, repeat your medication on that spot where the eyebrow was softened, and likewise do what you did at first, and enter therein until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of a myrtle tree's branch.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	The shapes of the beards that men have are varied according to their magnitude and stature, hence a person's beard style is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	A1: The path of justice was not affected by the one who studied in this article.
Capitol .xvii.	English: XVII is the Roman numeral representation for the number seventeen. It consists of an 'X' (representing ten) and two smaller 'I's on either side, each representing one, so when combined they represent 10 + 1 + 1 = 17. The term "Capitol" might be unrelated to this context unless you are specifically referring to a chapter or section number in a document titled "The Capitol".
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	The surgical treatment of the tear duct (lacrimal) on the left side.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	Here is the translation from Old Occitan to English:
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	In the passionate heat of summer, an hour of wine or a glass of young grape must is delightful with the scent of fresh grass.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Appropriates cauldrons for the purpose of this method are typically made of copper or other metals with high thermal conductivity, such as aluminum. These materials ensure even heat distribution and efficient transfer during the process known as cauterization. Cauterization is a medical procedure that involves burning part of a body to remove or close off a part of it. It's commonly used for sealing wounds, removing tissue (like tumors), stopping bleeding in surgery, and more.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Quale si concia, così come è costituita di rame (cana) o di ferro a vite (voltor), dalla punta all'estremità dove viene effettuato il bruciamento (cautéri).
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If the two sides converge, enter into each other's opposite ends.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	C, then you will have succeeded as well.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the one who is humble is better than your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	If the external part of the abscess is overtaken and between his health and dryness that area lies.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it's not too much trouble, I would appreciate more information on that and the extra details related to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Take the lighter and light up the cauldrons you have prepared, and place a small bit of it on your nose at the beginning, so that neither illness nor discomfort disturbs you; afterwards, keep the cauldrons warm on the hearth.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	At the outset of your treatment with cauterization if you enter into the bone, it's fine; otherwise, repeat the cauterization after some hours or days as necessary; and leave that so for three days, then rest over the affected area and apply a drying ointment to promote healing.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	After eleven days and without sleep, the hours pause on the acute corrosive poison within which bone is discovered, as it should be according to your guideleby Mays (1342).
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	E is a secondary method of cauterizing a fistula which involves the first described procedure: at the location of the fistula and then puncturing that area carefully through that small opening; thus, in this case, it is done with a certain amount of molten lead. And in your hand, have good retention, so as not to cause harm from where the lead does not reach the hole; and ensure pauses over the hole cover with either a piece of wood or water, for the lead will remain at the location of the fistula and heal that area wonderfully.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula has not healed after we've mentioned cauterization and curative treatments, then yes, it is necessary to administer traction of the nose and reduce the fistula along its natural course according to what will occur in its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII. The Capitol Building, located in Washington D.C., serves as the seat of the United States Congress and a symbol of democracy. It was designed by architect Thomas U. Walter and stands on the east side of the National Mall. Its iconic cast-iron dome has become an enduring representation of American government and history.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Cauterization of the wound from a puncture.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Often used tampons can cause tears in the vaginal lips, mainly in those of young girls.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So you take care of those cracks in the water that we mentioned in the divisions and do not waste your treatment. Hours later, they will heal using a small stainless steel tool according to this method which I describe: firstly, ensure the area is cleaned thoroughly with soap and warm water; dry it well before applying any product or curing solution. Apply a thin layer of an appropriate sealant over the cracks, ensnaring them completely but avoiding excessive application that might clog nearby pipes. Allow the sealant to set for at least 12 hours before running water through it again. Regular checks should be made in the following days to monitor progress and ensure proper healing of the cracks. If issues persist, consider seeking professional help as further investigation may reveal underlying problems needing specialized treatment.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	E bears the beauty of its second by surpassing in subtlety that of silk. (This translation might not fit perfectly as "subtlety" and "second" are ambiguous, but it tries to convey a sense of elegance or refinement found within something second-best.)
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	In that initial moment, the spark ignited within those cracks wherein the wax would eventually reach the edge of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	B. It's better to be safe than sorry, as it prevents any potential harm in the future.
Capitol .xix.	Capitalization is an important aspect of writing in the English language, as it helps to clarify meaning and emphasize certain words or phramenents. Here are some general rules for capitalizing different parts of a text when referring to capitals:
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Cauterization of an oral fistula.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	In case of abscesses in the uvula or palate or gingivae, inflammation occurs which causes swelling and tearing, aging, bleeding, and creation of a fistula; do not let it heal on its own, as it may require cauterization depending on the amount received through the fistula. Apply that heat to the area of the fistula, insert your finger until it reaches near or at the end of the root, and then perform one or two washings with this warm liquid as advised for healing during which sanitation has occurred.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the wound is small and healing, it's okay; otherwise, you will need to discover the location and remove the rotten bone according to what comes up in your next chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Capitalization plays a crucial role in written English, as it helps distinguish proper nouns and titles from other words, thereby conveying meaning with precision and clarity. Here are some key rules for capitalizing correctly in the English language:
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Cauterization of the gums and soothing of the sores.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are soothed by moisture and the teeth are healthy, then those ones with no cavities can be treated with medicines, therefore avoiding extractions at times. To cauterize, heat is applied to the form that will come close enough. Do this quickly after applying a bit of paste onto the tooth so the warmth from the fire reaches the depth where decay has occurred and provides relief.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	A propel your mother and then iterate the procedure several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	A person suffering from a toothache can try rinsing their mouth with warm saltwater for about an hour, and then wait quietly as this may help in numbing the painful tooth, reducing inflamm#ation of the gums, and drying out any infection. However, it is always best to consult a dentist for proper treatment.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI: The Majesty of the Capital City
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	Toothache due to decay or an infection, if not relieved by medicine, the treatment involves cauterization at that area according to two methods: using a hot iron rod or applying heat with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	"At the border between two properties lies an old iron fence with various hooks on its surface. Gather some strong rope and wrap it around a section of that fancied boundary, then secure one end tightly at the corner. Wrap the entire length over the fence's edge until fully covered by the rope. Next, place a heated iron rod along the wire mesh just above where you suspect there may be nails or sharp edges causing discomfort."
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	A) It is necessary to consider that some vegetables contain various nutrients which will reach the level of adequacy for health upon consumption.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish, immerse a cloth or cotton in the liquid below mentioned and place it on the sore tooth, then press that firmly for some time until the pain relieving effect takes place.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization must be hot enough that you attend to the entire gum or iron of the wound, and it should be in such a manner that the heat does not reach the throat of the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Approaches to apply a caustic substance for removing warts include the use of various methods, such as direct application or immersion in the chemical agent. The specific method depends on the size and location of the wart(s), but generally involves cleaning the affected area thoroughly before applying the chemical. Here's an example procedure:
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	The translation from Occitan to English would be: "A method for alleviating the malaise that often affects one's mouth and throat, by applying this cauterization technique - hold it against a good surface of the tongue for an hour and then spit out. This is the form of the cauterization."
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	A cautiously, you will cut off the branch that you can reach according to your ability.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of a catheter: cylindrical with a flexible tube and an opening or tip that allows fluid to be inserted into, or removed from, a body space such as a blood vessel, duct, or chamber. The shape is designed for easy insertion and removal while minimizing discomfort and damage to the surrounding tissues.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII: The Heart of the Nation - Exploring Washington D.C.'n Capital City
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Cauterization of the external genitalia (in Spanish) or Cauterization of the exterior genitals (in English).
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	In case of abscess and festering humors, you should take certain medicines to dissolve them; then you can apply those medications as follows - the instrument used for this has two pointed ends through which a fumigating smoke is produced, so place that instrument on the affected area once, and if necessary repeat, until it reaches the edge of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, leave it to heal naturally for some time according to its quantity, and apply a poultice over it for three days or until you see that the skin has fused where the heat has burned through.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	A: Ah, I see that you are seeking guidance on how to treat wounds and dressings in order to promote healing. Here's some advice for you:
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the cannula or electrode is such that it serves as a conductor.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII: The Bustling Streets of London
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	The treatment of laryngitis involves the application of antibiotcuous agents and vocal rest.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidities come over the pulmonary canal and mainly when this is caused by chills of congestion, it often indicates that the illness should be evacuated at mealtime with medicinal laxatives, and shortly afterwards cauterize whichever duct needs to be cleared in the previously emptied location.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Here's the translation from Asturian to English:
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	He will cauterize that other wound near the joint of the neck at its last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	A•l cautery on his shoulder is done in the following manner:
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	B. The right to that water which is followed within the area where it has been purified.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIIII: A Day in the Life of a Capital City
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Treatment for lung disease and cough through cautery.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	The patient has pulmonary humidity and chronic lung disease, without fever or coughing, it is a long-standing illness, the right shoulder was treated with cauterization over the furcula (the breastbone), as well as the left shoulder where lumps were observed between two nipples; also, another cauterization on the upper part of the thigh between two mammary glands in line with the previous procedure.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you want to perform earwax removal using cauterization (also known as ear candling), the shape of the cone that is used should resemble the point at which there is pain in the ears. Please note, however, that cauterizing for ear wax removal can be dangerous and is not recommended by medical professionnals.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	BS, the injection is made into the veins of those who are at risk; and as long as they have taken in that particular medicine previously without any adverse effects.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Indeed, there are three ways to perform a cauterization or the same procedure can be done in four stages. Here is one way you can do it:
Capitol .xxv.	Book I - The Foundation of Rome
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	The translation of "De cauterization dl ti tilici, care e captul ajutării" from Romanian to English is: "About the cauterization of titilli, which is the title of help."
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	The onset of the dislocation is caused by lubricating fluids and not corrected in time upon its return to usual waters, so that it gets displaced within the hours of its regular return, and then moves slightly as we have testified; therefore first reduce the displacement, and appropriately let the evil be reversed onto your head or your left thigh; and appropriately lift the leg whose dislocation is at the joints on the inner side of the right calf muscle, according to what you mentioned.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Approximately 25% of propane cylindangs do not have two caps, and this is the reason why.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	A) Carefully, cauterize the wound on one side to ensure that it enters inside the other side of the graze or sore; and after a few hours (usually around four), observe the effectiveness of the cauterization treatment.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	In English, the subtlety of a joke often depends on the quantity and context in which it is attempted. This is how you can phrase it: The more attempts made to make a joke, the greater its subtlety becomes; this is just one way of saying it. However, if there's any specific aspect or detail about jokes, humor, or language that you want me to focus on in translation, please let me know!
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some waxes are adjusted according to this count and for which they have eight candlewicks (cauterizations).
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Apply pressure over the cauterized wound with salt, and use it to bring relief from pain, enscribing that the member is not sore for any length of time during which comfort may be found.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is to the lower parts and it occurred suddenly, heat therapy should be applied over the affected muscle or clavicle joint, as the connection is confirmed and moisture is reduced, leading to healing of the ailment.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI. The legislative process of the United States Congress, a bicameral institution comprising two chambeboth houses - the Senate and the House of Representatives, is rooted in centuries-old practices that have evolved to balance representation between states with diverse populations and interests.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Stomach cauterization.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	The illness has entered his stomwart and caused moist swellings that gradually spread throughout the complex, multiplying its effects if you continue with your treatment methods without providing proper support; soon it may affect him completely, extending its influence over his limbs and body parts; therefore, perform thermal cauterization at those three points: one on the heel equivalent to the size of a small grain, and two others corresponding to the width of the ankle bone, ensuring they form a triangular shape; meanwhile, ensure there are no unsuitable areas that may cause irritation.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	C'est faux, le profit du cautérisation n'est pas directement proportionnel à trois quarts des dimensions de la cornée. La relation entre la profondeur de la cautérisation et les mesures anatomiques de l'œil est plus complexe et dépend de divers facteurs tels que le type de procédure ophtalmologique, lancier l’instrument utilisé, ainsi que le jugement cliniquement fondé par le médecin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	S is the figure of a caul on this shape with an addition, and if you wish to perform a larger cauterization at the upper part of the stomach according to this shape; then let that be a circular cautery as per the following manner:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	S is to cauterize the puncture on the stomach at which one gets scared of the caustic agent: and place your fingers over the stamen according to the amount you wish to try, and then cauterize that spot with the caustic agent; and afterwards apply the treatment prescribed before it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Title: "Capitol XXVII"
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	The surgical removal of the hemorrhoidal tissue.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	Quan entende en el fitxatge dolor debido a sequedad o humedad excesiva o por vientos fuertes fuera del estado normal complejo que se desprende con eyección superflua, es cura el malestar con agua como antes mencionado y no contaminada; horas cuente que el malestar sea reposado sobre su cerebro, y seda tres veces con hielo de acuerdo a esta forma y cantidad metida sobre el fitxatge dejado del hipocampo mientras hace el decúbito.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Let S be the surface area between every two cauldrons according to their diameters, and let the length of the handles be determined by their lengths.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	E do not purchase the fake gold coins.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of water that is attached to the quantity of the meadow's soil, and it does not flow away; and if disease comes upon its plants; and if there are no crops, then hours will pass, during which they have already extended their roots, and raised up their stems.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	Is this the shape of a cauterizing iron:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	It is possible that you have mastered the art of cutting using knives through your subtlety and prudence in this craft.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	E don't process too much in the caulking, and make sure to seal the entire pipe so that it is properly sealed for all sections and reaches inside the chambers, because the pipe here is delicate; know this well.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter Twenty-Eight (Capitol)
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	In the case of an abscess in the palate, it may be treated with cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	Quan el hematoma excita l'apòstema en les vèrines i vols coneixe si aquell apòstema es a la carn del fètge o al pann de llaüt, segons si és a la carn del fètge, el malaltia atrope gravitat i el dolor es acru.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	Sì è nella guaina del fiocco che il dolore diventa un'acuta sensazione di dolore e spesso le fratture si affaticano fino alla terapia.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	The illness has turned against the body's own heart; and with skill she locates the site of the inflammation; and with iron she cauterizes the clot, which shape had been mentioned in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	A is burned by that which has been cauterized; within the whole body being imbued, until it reaches the joints, and then takes effect through friction.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	A) Antibiotic ointment is used to prevent infection and promote healing of other wounds within which it has been applied.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	E in the cove that this form of cauterization is used, not the one from which he studied in the art of medicine is extended, and in many cases it causes harmful diseases; however, some have attempted this operation several times, but I would rather suggest you follow a safer alternative.
Capitol .xxix.	Section 29 of the United States Code, commonly referred to as "Capitol", is a section of federal legislation that deals with various aspects related to the operations and functions of the United States Congress. This includes matters such as congressional staff employment, travel allowances for Members of Congress, and regulations governing Congressional offices within the Capitol building in Washington D.C.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Cautery of bleeding vessels.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Dissolving the antics cauteries of Aristotle's logic into plausible fractions according to this method involves breaking down Aristotle's complex logical concepts into smaller, more digestible parts that can be understood and applied easily. To do so, you would take a lengthy argument from Aristotelian logic and distill it into its fundamental components—its premises, conclusions, and the structure of reasoning used to connect them. This process makes the original argument both clearer and easier for others to understand and utilize in their own thinking or analysis.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	A) Submerge a line under the ribs and along the belly until reaching the navel; and two cautery points placed just below the nipples on either side, slightly deviating towards where the chest ends. Another point is placed between the fifth intercostal space and the xiphoid process, slightly inclined towards the back parts. Another one at the midline of the abdomen; also above it in the epigastric region; with three points on either side just below the umbilicus. Finally, a point is placed between the two nipples, and two along each lateral edge of the pectoral muscles.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	E in the cove where you purchase your own sewing machine, it should not be shown on the label of the manufacturer'n work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	A priest says certain prayers that the homes use in cauldrons of iron similar to rays and fires; they place this at a location between the shores where we arrived with an abscess, as well as its related sore health, just as we have described in the case of the fever.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this piercing procedure he had not applied cauterization, because it would soon cause him harm at the location of the fistula which was not being treated effectively.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital XXX.com is a prominent online entertainment news and gossip website that focuses on Hollywood, celebrity culture, pop music, fashion, film, TV shows, and various trending topics. The site provides its readers with breaking news stories, exclusive interviews, rumors, photoshoots, celebrity sightings, and more. As an influential source of information about the entertainment industry, Capital XXX.com attracts millions of visitors daily who are interested in staying up-to-date on their favorite celebrities' lives and activities.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Cauterization of a hemorrhage.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	I treat the disease of melasma with water as we have mentioned in the treatment section and do not confer your curing method; three hours after setting, perform cauterization according to one of these three proper methods, depending on the length of the melasma lesions following the figures of cauterizations described:
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Article E - The size of the burns caused by any given instrument shall be similar in nature and proportion to those created by a few minor instruments, and the shape or contour of the burn from any given instrument should resemble that described for firesetting.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And may peace be upon you, my beloved brothers and sisters; and evil thoughts be far from your mind.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	E is another method of cauterization; it involves the use of two vessels causing a localized effect in the muscle'n caput region and elevates the tendon that lies at the end of the femur, alleviating the painful condition without resorting to surgery.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	Let e be the height at which you lift the ladder according to the length of the rope, so that they form a right-angled triangle with respect to the ground. The question is asking for the relationship between the height (e), the length of the rope and the distance from the base of the ladder to the wall.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	A trespasses interfere with both designs, igniting conflict in that area where those boundaries overlap from the other party'amoors.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	A) Extract the essence of the herb and then apply four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you'd like, I can provide information on the process of cauterization and its effects. Cauterization involves burning a part of the body to remove or close off a part of it, which is often used in medical procedures to stop bleeding or prevent infection. Please note that while this method was commonly used in the past and may still be employed under certain circumstances, modern medicine typically relies on other techniques for these purposes.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	The treatment of warts using caustic methods is considered more effective than other previous approaches in the healing process over a few weeks' time.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXVII
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Cauterization of a wound.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	In English, the sentence could be translated to: "Cavaliers with no horses in droves but in their proper ranks."
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	I do not treat le dropsy with the methods of cure mentioned in section B; you should have them cauterized on four places around their body as follows: one near the belly button, one over the stomach, another over the groin, a fourth between the spines of the back, and a fifth just to the right of the pelvis.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The amount of depth in the burn affects the extent of hand skin damage.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	A properly applied caustic soda burner can provide you with long-term benefits.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	The disease of chronic earwax can be treated by gently applying warm water to the affected area, so that it may be softened and removed easily; also, take appropriate medication as prescribed for relief, and seek medical help promptly if necessary.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cauldriform seal used to cauterize the abdamen is claviform according to its form, which resembles that one and it's the one where the two olivares are cauterized as per their previous shapes.
Capitol .xxxii.	The term "Capitol" in Roman numerals is represented as "CCPIII". Here't the breakdown of how it works:
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Cauterization of wounds and scars.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the fish stings in fresh water and their wounds are filled with clear water, cover them over the back of your hand in lukewamoist water which is between your earlobe and ring finger, then elevate your arm upwards and do not turn it; and also raise your arm while keeping that position until all the water has run off.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is performed as follows: F the tip of each pair of scissors on both sides of the incision, and at the end of each scalpel blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	In English, the text would read as follows:
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	E layssam had a plague for a long time, and as such no water was seeping out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	A) As the causes which we have mentioned above.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII - The Legacy of the Capitol
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Laparotomy for stomach wounds (or injuries).
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	Concerning the treatment of excessive belching and humidity that causes flatulence, it is related to digestebeliefs and retention within the stomach and intestines; this is treated with aqueous therapy for discharges due to curative maneuvers and not by confinement. Patients suffering from these symptoms may require cauterization of excessive secretions, as previously discussed in the stomach's cauterization treatment; also apply cauterization to the umbilical region subtilly, four cauterizations on the navel circle subtly, and a subtil subcutaneous clavicular cauterization. Lastly, cauterize the alcatine over large lymph nodes or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	When excessive humidity and water intolerance are combined with the use of certain herbs such as fennel seeds and buds, they can effectively treat digestive issues including those related to the stomach and groin areas. This remedy provides a highly effective cure for conditions that may have been previously overlooked or misdiagnosed.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XLIV. The Political Landscuce of the Capital City.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	The ancient hemorrhoids cauterization process.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	In the past, if you find yourself suffering from ancient ulcers, excessively thick mucus or corrupted humidities in your body, and these conditions have not been healed by the methods mentioned earlier, then proceed as follows for treatment: Using hot water previously discussed, apply a cauterizing process with three small triangular pieces of metal to the dried pus on the spondylitis. Additionally, perform two cauterizations below the navel area using another pair of these metal pieces.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	To prevent the stomach from becoming cold and to ensure that the meat is not overcooked, trim the fat on your lamb frequently as described above; also place a hot iron on the belly of the lamb using several small pieces according to the instructions mentioned previously, one piece on the thighs, another on the loin, and leave it in place for some time while ensuring that you insert it when healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital v5
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	The circumcision of the foreskin is performed around the glans of the penis.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	Remove the tape from your eyes and gaze into the mirror that is assembled in front of you.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	The metal rod that goes into the tube in that cylindrical container, and finally the main one enters which reaches the caustic substance at the opening of the vessel where you see blood flowing.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Brewing tea with one quart of water and two teaspops of tincture, apply heat to each container after counting, and then continue applying heat until the contents within are boiled. Use this mixture on those who have been infected as soon as possible for a speedy recovery.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you are burned with a large alkathene (cautery), it will heal more slowly in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Here is the Roman numeral representation for "capitol" followed by ".XXXVI":
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	The process of cauterizing fistulas that naturally occur in the lower parts involves using heat to burn or seal them, preventing further leakage and promoting healing. In English, this would be referred to as "The procedure of cauterizing natural fistulas located in the lower sections by applying heat for burning or sealing, which helps stop any leakage and encourages recovery."
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the prescribed work in its own place and the patient is terrified by it, they are treated with caution (cauterization).
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When any type of pipe is found in nature below the ground, it is ancient, and it can bring about health hazards from corrosion and contaminated water; therefore, it is more deserving that we cover it up rather than attempt to use it as a source for subtle tricks or deceptive schemes based on the quantity of its depth previously mentioned.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Approximately 20 Igniters resemble rays in appearance.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	A) To determine the appropriate amount of electric current to use for this fistulitis, and according to the extent of the area affected.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	It's essential to periodically review that the area where the wounds are located has been cleaned and disinfected to prevent them from becoming infected or overly dry due to being exposed for a few days or weeks, depending on your needs.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	E observa se tem um risco de infecção ou dano às veias; ou se a fístula levar ao abdômen ou à região pélvica, esteja atento a todas essas áreas; e não faça isso até que o trajeto da fístula esteja em tecido macio e você considere que é seguro.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	A) Cure the local within whom it is healthy.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the house is sealed and all matters have been separated for such a long time, hours have passed to know that it has been completely cleaned.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	"If the matters are not of little importance, spare no effort in trying to penetrate into their origin or understand those causes which will lead to a future recollection; they may hold significance."
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capital. Roman numerals use the letters of the Latin alphabet to represent numbers, with some letters representing specific values and certain rules for combination. In this system, "L" represents 50, "X" represents 10, and "V" and "I" each represent 5 and 1 respectively. To write the number 37 in Roman numerals, you combine L (50) with X (10), subtracting one unit from V (5), which gives us XXXVII:
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Cauterization of the chilblain.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When the eyes are in pain due to frequent rubbing or exposure to wind, and as a result of this affliction they become redness, hours later cause that you apply cauterization on those glands above each eye, where before application on every lid margin was performed.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	After the first healing session with a minor degree of heat, three more sessions will follow at increasing intensity levels to achieve complete recovery.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Here is the text with Roman numerals substituted for the Arabic numbers:
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Vesiculectomy (or bladder catheterization) - This is the English term for "De cauterizacio de la vesica," which refers to a surgical procedure where part of the bladamo is removed or treated with heat (cauterized). It's important to note that medical procedures should always be performed by qualified healthcare professionals.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	Quinacea (quassia) is used for bladder debility and mollification by rubbing and moisturizing in such a way that the urine does not retain its malodorousness; hours later, it cauterizes where there are pus residues on the vesicle. Then they start with the eyebrow hairs, and they cauterize one area to the right of it, then another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	E represents the length of each cutaneous lesion according to the number of blisters on the body; and treat that area with one incision at the lowest point of the back, or two incisions if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	F be cauterized at the wrist according to the procedure that was followed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXIX - The Capital City
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Cauterization of the cervix.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When menstruation arrives and moisture increases, impregnation is prohibited, and the periods become irregular, causing women to experience painful itching in their lower abdamo-pelvic region. Therefore, a local heat treatment should be applied using three cauterizations along the circumference of the navel (as mentioned in the vesical cauterization), as well as either one or two cauterizations above the posterior aspect of the bladder or on both sides with two cauterizations, and a clavicle cauterization should be performed.
Capitol .xl.	The term "Capitol" refers to the building where a legislative body meets, or it can also refer to the entire complex of buildings and grounds around that central structure. In the United States, for example, each state capital typically has its own Capitol Building which houses the legislature and offices related to government operations. The most famous Capitol in the U.S. is the one located in Washington D.cu where the Congress meets: The U.S. Capitol.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Cauterization of the ankle dislocation.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	The rainfall increases at the beginning of autumn and has caused flooding in its area due to soil erosion and landslides; moreover, it is noted that this phenomenon persists longer when compared with other regions.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The place of the displacement is observed in how it behaves during an earthquake.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Adonc, cauterizas le malade sobre la partida de l'ampa de lu am cauteri a sèrcle, si tu t'en sens bien à essayer en le cirque du departement ainsi comme ès revolguda, et pour so que la partida capa el mieu loch del cercle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	A is the set of procedures which follow from the procedure in gastric cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cauldron is not present now, then at that time you shall cauterize with three cauldrangs the olive grove great.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	C performs the cauterization according to the quantity of the severity of the entire wound, and carefully within that area where it has healed.
Capitol .xli.	I believe you're referring to "Capitolium," the temple dedicated to the Capitoline Triad in ancient Rome, which consisted of Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva. This temple was located on top of the Capitoline Hill (Capitol). The term xli is a Roman numeral representing 44.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Sciatic nerve cauterization.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	In the anvil of pain, caused by excessive moisture and dampness, the illness is treated with the water we have mentioned earlier and not through medication; that water is ancient, so you may find relief from the ailment due to heavy humors using foul-smelling pills or artificial pills or similar substances; moreover, be cautious about applying heat in such cases.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization is known in that area according to two methods: the first one with burning chemicals (cauterization with medicinal caustics), or the second one using fire (cauterization with a hot iron).
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Following two scientific methods, one of which involves cauterizing the area three times in a triangle shape and ensuring adequate depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	Let S be the set of all spaces between each pair of points in a given subset, and let E be the quantity (measure) of the closeness or similarity of those spaces wherein the distances are measured by either an "olive oil" metric or a "grain" metric.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some of his healings involve the use of hot irons applied to certain locations on the head for which there are four types of burns (cauterization).
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If it breaks, suture the circle that precedes the shape during the suturing of the shoulder dislocation, and ensure the surrounding area is fully covered with stitches.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the keyhole cauterization method when pain is adjacent to the jaw and not extended into the cavity.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	In English, this text translates to the following medical procedure: "Mays stretch within the fold, then sterilize that two pieces of metal (cautery) on the fold over the location where you will apply the evil that is pain; and place one piece of cauterization on the stick for about four minutes on the right part."
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	The depth of the skin cauterization should correspond to the amount of hair growth on the limb.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the pain is spreading to other parts of the body, or if the wound is large, it may be necessary to perform cauterization at this point using three or four points (or more as needed) on that area. This should only be done by a trained medical professional who can safely administer cauterization while minimizing damage and scarring.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the pain originates from the knee joints, then use here a hot-water bottle or an electric heating pad to apply heat in that area.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	In English: Look carefully at the entire area that you're treating and make sure not to damage any nearby nerves or blood vessels while trying to allecuate your bad pain or muscle spasm.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	In the first of those cases where a surgeon performs an incision over the stitch and last in the surgery, causing the wound to become infected with inflammeback, and ultimately perforating and completely destroying the skin tissue.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	An accidental poison ingestion can lead to severe stomach discomfort and potentially fatal consequences if not treated promptly. It is crucial to seek immediate medical attention in such cases for proper diagnosis and treatment.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	Is the pain in two episodes? According to this method, should each be cauterized separately?
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	E diysero las savis alcuzas en la quemadura (cauterización) del callo donde esta es la técnica: hacer semejante a círculo de hierro, cuyo perímetro sea el ancho de una palma; y tenga un orificio en su centro según la gruesidad de una hoja de datil o menos de media pulgada.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	E dessinté aquel circulo sea otro tercio; y sean las distancias que hay entre sus centros el doble del radio. Y sean aquellos círcul cuadrados de dos partes, y sea la longitud de aquellos radios uno o dos notas, y forma en esos márgenes una barrera uniformemente dibujada alrededor de los círculos; así es su figura:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Put some paper in the fire so that it smolders and produces sparks, and then place your hand over the chimney opening, keeping bad luck away from you.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	So, let's go back to that time when we had three cats playing in the garden.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	For three days, apply this ointment to the area once or twice daily; then cover that area with bandage and leave it for several days without touching or disturbing it; finally, take care of that area inside which is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diethylbenzene : although we have rarely used this type of caustic paste due to its concerning characteristics and because there are few known varieties that address these concerns.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May's fire scorched the bushes that suffered, and tended to the place of it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Mays cauteri are medicinal, have two circular heads with perforations in which to insert the tip of a needle at the edge of a piece of iron; their length should be such that they consist of two nuts or similar objects.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	"If the spaces between such quantities of size are equal and they lie above and below eache other, and they contain themselves in this manner:"
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	In this old manuscript text in Occitan (a Romance language spoken mainly in southern France), the directions appear to describe a healing ritual involving warm water and a small fire. Here'ebody, I have translated it into modern English for better understanding:
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Dear user, here is your text in English: "Elevate the bowl with your right hand and remove all water from the cup."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Accordingly, it shall be allowed for three days and rest within the border that lies between blackness of midnight until dawn to let the horse run freely on its pasture; this is considered last in jest.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	B) An apple a day keeps the doctor away.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain is spread within the joint or compartment, apply cold therapy in that area according to what you find in the guidelamo method.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	Here is the method of cold water cure, and I have also written it in the treatise on medicine purification techniques.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for Salt and Vinegar Chips (One Batch)
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	You pause to let the back of one wave wash over another incoming wave, and then step onto that saltwater causing two-thirds of it to recede quickly as you walk forward with good pressure. Then look at how the sharp water diminishes in the wake of the refracted wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Approximately three quarts of that water is used to refresh and replenish other vital substances and alkalies, as during periods of strong perspiration, which are administered in various medical operations and in the cauterization of other body parts, where heat plays a role.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	However, some medicines are applied externally and internally in such a way as to provide targeted treatment without being consumed completely or causing harm when combined with other substances.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	"A man from ancient times was treated and cured by a special operation for his sciatic nerve pain and swollen veins. He marvelously says that he doesn't need any other treatment, as it has healed him completely within one week, just like described in the story, and now greatly benefits from the procedure."
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	It must be that the grape is recently picked, and if not trodden, it should become a fig; moreover, soaked in water for a little while and placed on the stump where there is pain or swelling, or inflammamoins, and tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	E shall be liable for the amount of three hours or for whatever damage is caused by his delay in payment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	A prop to that in bath and then when the pain of your headache lessens, involve yourself in the sun, as the agony subsides and you are healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Herbs that should not be used in any case of caution, only for the purpose of body cleansing.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Mays and Escorides taught that when a goat's gutter vein is cauterized, one should first apply oil; then the second cautioning follows this manner: its lamb's wool yarn soaked in ancient oil, and tightly tied between the paws of the foot and the cavity.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	To dye wool with natural ingredients, prepare the following materials and steps:
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	A proper hydraturation can help to alleviate the sensation of sharp pain and allow for restful relaxation within the body, preventing discomfort from lingering on.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This particular brand of electrocautery is called Bovie's electrosurgical unit.
Capitol .xlii.	In English, the Roman numeral "XLII" translates to the Arabic number 42. The letter 'X' represents ten and 'L' symbolizes fifty; when they are placed one before another as in this case, we subtract ten from fifty, which gives us forty (40). Then adding two ('I') to it results in forty-two (4^2). So "Capitol .xlii" would be written numerically as Capitol. 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Curettage of the second-degree burn wound.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some back pain can be caused by trauma or injury due to overexertion or excessive vacuuming; also appears similar causes, through the ingestion of wet and dirty materials.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cauterization is a surgical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with heat, typically to stop bleeding from small blood vessels during an operation or injury. It can be performed using various methods and materials such as hot metal, electricity, lasers, or chemicals like silver nitrate. This technique has been used for centuries in medicine and is still utilized today under controlled conditions by trained professioncups to ensure patient safety and effective outcomes.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	In the event of illness, take two pills twice a day with food or milk according to your tolerance and the effectiveness of this medication, plus do not exceed the dosage indicated on each tablet, which should be within three times the width of the pill.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	The translation of "E s-a facut cuṭurărización la cauterizare a punctului" from Romanian to English is: "A cauterization was made at the point."
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you want to perform a unilaterer or bilateral cauterization on three or four medial collaterals according to this method, follow these steps:
Capitol .xliii.	In English, the Roman numeral "XLIII" translates to the Arabic numeral "43". The term "Capitol" often refers to a building where a state or national legislature meets; in the United States, it typically signifies one of three buildings on Capitol Hill in Washington D.C., namely the North Capitol, South Capitol and the iconic Capitol Building itself which houses both chambamoons and senate offices. However, without additional context, I cannot provide a more specific translation or explanation for "Capitol .xliii". If you could provide further information regarding how these terms are being used, that would be helpful in delivering an accurate response.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	During the circumcision procedure for phimosis.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Maladies such as scoliosis can appear in children at this age, and the hallmark of its onset is when it affects their structure causing abnormal curvature and movement in the spine.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	In the last paragraph of this text, there are several words that belong to the Basque language (Euskera): "europarlamentaren" (Parliamentarians), "espondilak" (slabs or layers), and "notz" (ice). The influence is seen as these Basque terms stand out amidst Spanish words, indicating a bilingual setting typical of the Basque Country in Spain.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Alright, here is a similar request in English:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Please take the cauterizing tool over all parts of the spinal deformity.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you want to perform a cauterization on the spinal disc at two or three points along the circuit line, follow these steps:
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	I'm not sure what you mean by "sian les puntz propdas." It seems like there might be some typos or incorrect words here. Could you please clarify your request so that I can assist you better? If it'er to translate something from one language to another, feel free to let me know the original text and which languages are involved!
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Certainly, here is the English translation of your text: "Please let it be known that all the land within this area shall remain as healthy water as you have stated."
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Mays watches to ensure that caulking has not been applied in situations of swelling due to nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Curing of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pains become too severe due to imbalances of the bodily humors, which are found in every member of the body and cause pain when they come down on the limbs, it is common for masseurs to call this condition "podagra" directly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	It seems that you have been prescribed a treatment for gout, which may involve medication and lifestyle changes to manage the condition. If pain persists or worsens, it is recommended to consult with your doctor who may consider further options such as laser therapy for relief. Always follow the guidance of healthcare professionals when dealing with medical issues.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	In English, this can be translated to: "E is what you close off that accumulation in the circuit at the junction of the left middle cerebrer's shunt."
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Let S be the oval spheroid of which this is the shape:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	It is necessary that the piercing on the lobe is done using a sterilized needle and it should be performed by a professional during their working hours through electrocautery or freezing method.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain persists in the joints or at other junctions, and then swelling occurs, one should apply a heat compress on each affected area for three times daily or four during the entire session with this olive oil-based heating pad.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	It is not advisamo(u)ble to use the same cautery for both purposes; that this cautery should be at hand whenever necessary, do not prematurely remove your own (personal) caustic before the time has come; only expose the vessel of the vein.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pains compete within the skull and ears, hours administer the caution we have mentioned in its chapters.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	So are the pains indeed very intense, and she is aghast, her hours marked in the cycle of lamps just as they turn, marked on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	From the pains come relief in words, hours marked on the circuit of bulbs above each note and over the rim of a cup at dawn.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain is nearing the joints as often as the bones or the muscles, then at times it overwhebes all the helpers.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	In English: "E does not complain about the bad health and reception of medicine; rather it is in good regimen, so that with this cauterization she was healed, God helps."
Capitol .xlv.	Act V, Scene II of William Shakespeare's play "Julius Caesar" is set in the Roman Senate House or Curia Pompey. This location plays a pivotal role as it becomes the stage for the conspirators' plan and the tragic outcome of their plot to assassinate Julius Caesar. The tension, political intrigue, and dramatic confrontations that occur here contribute significantly to the climax and resolution of the play.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Hemorrhoidectomy for hemorrhoids (also known as piles) - This is a surgical procedure to remove excessive or abnormally located tissue that has formed into painful, swollen veins in the anus and rectum. It's often considered when other less invasive treatments have not been effective.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	In those times, the priest would enter the confessional booth and speak through a partition to his penitent; he began offering absolution, hoping that God might pardon their sins on this very day and grant them leniency so they could be freed from sin in His grace.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Pass on the message to your people that they should keep their hands within themselves and command them not to throw or reveal any hides or skins.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Aprop returns the corresponding keys and password that attempt to break through the ones on the edges, which seem to be similar to the circular uppercase letters in ascending order of shifting (e.ebfh...) of the given ciphertext.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Articles on the application of cauldrons in traditional methods, this is their form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Before you go, please make sure to wear your jewelnery (jewelry).
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	C decreases the size of his budget and increases its efficiency towards acheback his ownership, as well as securing the location for him where the property does not risk getting lost.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	Then you too shall experience the trials of illness and recovery, and also serve it as a companion, and further attend to its needs; the which holds dearest your love.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Apropriate pause cauterization over the said scar, and if you are unable to achieve this in one session within the first half-hour of your appointment, schedule another session at a time that is convenient for you, ensuring that there is an adequate amount of time between sessions.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Upon examining the wound dressing at the time of its application, one should ensure that it is clean and sterile to prevent further infection or other serious complications.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	You who seek my aid must not burn the oils; otherwise you will lose your effort.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	C: The heel of the child should be circumcised according to its size and proportionate measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Clean the area of the cauterization for three days to ensure that the healing process is proceeding well.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	C) He who loves others as if they were already healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The illness shall last for forty days within which the place and its surroundatur are to be sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	The skin provides various nourishment over time during the healing process of a wound; and that the scab does not prevent the body from expending efforts to recover.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	How long will it take for the supplies to last adequately and sustain us for another X days?
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	A is to abstain from labor and consumption of food and drinks, and from intense voting, as the full adherence to this health regimen will entirely restore one's well-being.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	The care of ruptures in the other parts of the abdamen is to cauterize them at once and do not let them heal, hours later cauterize the rupture of that certain point according to its quantity, using as much water as is excreted from the vein; and with this same fluid that we have mentioned, it must not be diluted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	In English: Firstly, the cuts should be sealed with a triangular incision according to this method, and then sutured accordingly.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	A line that runs parallel to the latitude in the high mountain range of the rift zone is another line below it; and pause your hand at the first knot (knot), but the second knot is higher and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Title: English Studies and Literature - Chapter XLVI: The Role of Language in Shaping Society's Ideals
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Surgical ablation of torticollis.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	Some members experience pain during or after the injection of fillers and continue to feel that pain for a long time without relief from traditional medicine; they may then consider trying thermal ablation with electrocautery at specific points as an alternative treatment option.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	E shall be the burns on all members according to the magnitude and size of them, their value and vehemence, and location of blistering and pain they cause.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If his wound is not healed by the first cauterization, then it is; and if not, hours iterate over him the cauterization again; for that's how those pains are punctured in the limb close to the "u", so you want to achieve with these good cauterizations that the illness heals.
Capitol .xlvii.	In English, "capitol" refers to the building where a legislative body meets. It is most commonly used in the United States to describe the buildings where both houses of Congress meet – The Senate and The House of Representatives. These are located in Washington D.C., with Capitol Hill being home to the iconic U.S. Capitol Building, which serves as the meeting place for the U.n. S. Congress.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Leprosy cauterization.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	"The Brother Albert's treated burns with great care using a special remedy for the type of leprosy that is made from flaxseed and melancholy."
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	So then if you wish to cauterize that [wound], consider whether the disease is contagious and how it may be healed with water as mentioned in the division, and do not forget or neglect this, lest the corruption comprehend your entire body and all its complexities. Cut around that area carefully on the head using a cauterizing instrument: one on the top of the forehead near the hairline, two just below it; three at the front in line with the eyebrows; four at the temples; and five behind or toward the neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	In the last instance of your treatment, a small ember is placed inside the wound within the bone using a specialized instrument, causing any previously lodged pieces to be dislodged so that healing gases are released from the area; then sterilize over the incision as it has been performed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	The leprosy spreads over the flesh and becomes visible in its manifestations; thus wash those parts you have mentioned at the head; and burn with a cauterizing instrument on the extremity of the nose, and twice upon both nostrils, and twice upon two spines of the neck, and six times upon the spinous processes of the vertebrae, and one large time over the spinous process adjacent to the collarbone, and once over the clavicle, and twice on each shoulder blade, and once on every rib, and twice over both iliac crests, and once over the sacrum. Also burn upon all joints of the limbs mentioned above and below, and upon any ankle, and once upon each tendon of his hand; and twice upon the calf muscles, and twice upon the neck muscles.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Here is the translation of your text in English:
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some wounds are sealed with a heating iron (cauterizer) on the skin of the penis and another one over the mouth of the stomach, and another one on the foot.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Know that which is most suitable for you to undergo cauterization, as much good it shall bring and bestow; And know that if the illness does not lie in the area being cauterized, thus with this knowledge rest assured, since your body has already been stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	Article C - Burns caused by small or large objects according to the body parts and joints as follows, depending on the types of tools used:
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	A proper care involves cleaning the wound with an antiseptic, applying a sterile gauze or dressing, and enscuint (or bandaging) it securely to promote healing. If the wound is deep, large, or shows signs of infection, seeking medical attention for further treatment may be necessary.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Cauterization of a coma (stupor).
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	If a person is wounded or asleep and receives medical care such as medicines, bandages, but does not heal, then you should apply cauterization to that member using a hot iron according to the severity of the body part or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	E be the piercing that enters the spinal cord very slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	C) The one who goes in there shall be healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	In some cases of paralysis, certain areas are cauterized to alleviate the stiffness in limbs and muscles, as well as spasms in both arms and legs, along with relieving nerve pain that affects the said limb; this procedure leads to an improvement.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Mayes are not formed from water but rather the fluid that is found in the anatomy of members and the exiting of nerves throughout the entire body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX (49) in English refers to "Chapter Forty-Nine." The Roman numerals 'XL' represents the number 40, and 'IX' represents the number 9; thus when combined they represent the number 49. This chapter notation is often used for books or documents that are divided into chapters.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	The surgical treatment for hemorrhoids (morphea).
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Quan albares es antiqua e no comferis a l'ulls dela enguentos de medicina, to cauteriza sobre aquella am cauteri preon un pauc segons la quantitat de la superficiet de la cotna entra que sia reumugida la blancura i la color de lu, i la color de lu sigui alterada.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	First, gather the ingredients for this flour and lentil oil recipe with rosemary leaves and columbus or yarrow seeds, each in equal parts mixed together, and pour them onto a flat surface then lightly crush them inside that they are broken.
Capitol .l.	In English, the word "Capitol" typically refers to a building where a legislative body meets. For example, in the United States it is most commonly associated with the U.S. Capitol Building located in Washington D.cu, which houses both chambers of Congress—the Senate and the House of Representatives. The term can also be used more broadly to describe similar buildings or structures where governmental meetings take place at local, state, or national levels.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Cerebral angioplasty
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	"Quan the thief began to escape and you saw him, there he was burned by that fiery wheel in the circular circuit just as it had revolved."
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	In English, the text translates to: "I have seen many cases where it was recommended that he/she should be cauterized at a later time; but I don't see it as such, because I fear it might become an ulcer, and I already saw this in some instances."
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	E is more directly related than it being cut off in the loop of my circle just as we have said; I have many wounds cut.
Capitol .li.	Capital LI is the country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Liechtenstein, a small landlocked nation in Central Europe bordered by Austria and Switzerland. The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) manages these domains under the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 two-letter codes of countries, which is why Liechtenstein has an .li domain. This ccTLD allows individuals, businesses, organizations in Liechtenstein to have a local internet presence with a web address that reflects their geographic location or nationality.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Cauterization of a wound or lesion. This medical procedure involves burning the skin with heated instruments, electricity, or caustic chemicals to remove or destroy tissue. It is often used for minor injuries and in surgeries where precise control over bleeding is necessary. In some cases, it can also be applied as a method of sterilization.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When certain fertilizers take too long to mature, and thus are produced in excess due to aging (becoming less effective), having little power, or because of the passage of time; if you want to speed up the process of maturing these fertilizers, apply heat evenly across the circuit with a controlled amount of current; then let it settle for as long as necessary until it has fully matured.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to perforate your root canal, here is the procedure for performing a root canal treatment and after which place that instrument where it should be inserted into: firstly, anesthetize the area around the tooth with local anestheseblocks, then access the pulp chamber by drilling through the crown of the tooth.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Cauterization should be performed on that specific location where there is scar tissue left, in order for the arm'e body to heal properly and as soon as possible after it has been cured.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter XII: The Legislative Branch and the Role of Congress in U.S. Government
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Sterilization of the ulceration area.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	It causes decay in the limb it touches, just as fiercely as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	If you apply heat to the spot where there is a burn with cauterization paste, then your icing should be applied using small needles or large ones as appropriate for that particular location where there is a burn.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	C. Avoid direct contact and thoroughly eliminate the entire area, ensnaring all of it in order to completely remove any traces or remnebrance of its existence.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Approach the affected areas after three days, and rest on the cleansed spots until all scars are completely healed and any contamination is entirely removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	A) The person who eats that meat is generating fat.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; malsino, la horas itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es rompida en les locs corrumputz.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	E (Escherichia) coli is a bacterium that can cause some infections; however, it is used in part of acute medicine as well, for example in the area of catheterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, the witches' fire burned with a furious intensity.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	You should see the doctor immediately if you suspect that your acute illness is serious and then follow their recommendations accordingly.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter IV: The Establishment of the United States Congress and its Influence on National Governance.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Cauterization of the glans and other similar procedures.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	The translation of the text in English is as follows:
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The fire you're using for the cauterization should resemble a small flame; otherwise, it will return and burn again, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the nail in its entirety, and should be fine-grained.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	A prop of the wire sparks above the key, and you rotate your hand on the soldering iron in the circuit with which the solder will reach deep into the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	On that very day, within three days he began to wear a coat.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Here'abrigación en la montaña, un pequeño pueblo se esconde bajo el manto del frío y la nieve. Los habitantes tienen su secreto para mantenerse calientes y sanos durante los duros inviernos: la salmuera tradicional de las malvas salvajes trituradas y sazonada con sal marina. Esta mezcla se guarda cuidadosamente en una vasija especial, donde las raíces absorben su esencia única.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	A proper care at the site of generation ensures that wounds are kept clean and healthy, promoting optimal healing conditions.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If you don't convert, and motion sicknesses often occur on the surface of the ship, especially in rough seas or high winds, sometimes it may be necessary to administer fresh water, so take a handful of raisins, oats, or peppermint leaves. Place that over your tongue; then add a little bit more water into that cup and swirl your mouth around with the mixture for some time, let the rim of the cup touch inside your cheek, and wait until you feel the movement of water at one point of the rim of the cup. Wait a while longer (about an hour), until you taste slight nausea from the water's motion; then take in that feeling with deep breathing or swallowing. This may help to alleviate seasickness symptoms due to the stimulation and distraction caused by these actions, as well as aiding digestion through increased saliva production.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	In English, this sentence from Occitan could be translated to: "Between the two of them lies all that comes above those of their own within themselves." This translation captures the essence but may not convey a clear meaning in modern English due to differences between the languages and lack of context. A more idiomatic version might read, "All that is above belongs equally to both of us," assuming it refers to sharing something they possess or have control over jointly. However, without additional context, it's challenging to provide a precise translation.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	A proper care for those who have had their nails clipped ensures that the skin in contact with the water does not become irritated or infected.
Capitol .liiii.	The Library of Congress is the oldest federal cultural institution in the United States and serves as both the research arm of Congress and a national library, preserving important historical records for future generabtions to study. It houses millions of books, recordings, photographs, maps, manuscripts, and other items from all over the world, making it one of the largest libraries in existence. The Library also provides access to its vast collection through interlibrary loans, online databases, and digital collections.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Cutting off of the tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	In cases of tetanus or tremor caused by irritation to the nerves or due to other similar causes, hours before you cauterize that limb on four sides around the spines of the back, between each spine a cauterization; and at the foot of it, and above its stomach an olive.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	The tremor of light pauses and hastens the healing of the ailing fish.
Capitol .lv.	Capital LV, or commonly known as CAPITOL LV in English, is a music group from Latvia that gained international recognition after winning the Eurovision Song Contest in 2017 with their song "You're In Love". Their vibrant and catchy tune won hearts across Europe.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Accidental cauterization of the left earlobe.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the gum boils and the pus-filled openings which are formed from corrupt materials are present; thus, during surgery it is recommended that they be cauterized on all sides of the fistula using a subtle caustic subtilglas or a lentil cauterizer. The tip of which should be extended to the flame, razor-sharp long electrocautery, or slow-burning caustic.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Some vegetables are cauterized before the commencement of their removal according to this method; they do not cause constipation and help eliminate excess waste, promoting healing in those individuals.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it seems that the water caused issues with evacuation and flood management.
Capitol lvi.	CAPITOL LXI (61 in Roman numerals) is the numbering of a building, room, or document that follows or directly succeeds Capitol LV (55). This numerical system originates from Ancient Rome and was used for various purposes such as counting, identification, and record-keepeby Romans.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Cauterization of a femoral fistula following an incision with electrocautery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops who have been wounded by arrows should first remove the arrow from the wound if it is still embedded, or initiate treatment for abscesses or cauterization of the affected limb, and then similar measures; however, recovery may be difficult in such cases.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	When you come across this tragic event involving your father's fall from the arcade and pause upon reading these words for the first time since that fateful day when the flow of his blood had ceased, know that we are here to support you.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	A) Heat causes the expansion of olive oil in large quantities and evaporates over those that are on fire, for a number of reasons.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	In case of a small or large second rupture in the vein that has been rapidly filled following the one you mentioned, and then cauterize it so as to seal off that blood vessel.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	E if the blood is expelled from the wound of the artery when you remove your dressing and extract the heated caustic, then another hot caustic immediately takes its place among those cauterizations which are being prepared in the fire, so that it does not cease to apply until the blood has been completely stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Here I watch so you do not catch fire with anger in this place, and bring it upon other illness or evil intention.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	In cases where there is an artery with a wound or lesion, healing may not be possible if the area is restricted by clothing, especially when the artery is large. There are typically four treatment methods to consider: cauterization as mentioned before, extracción (extraction) if it has not been previously removed; if it has been extracted, then the extremities of the wound may become infected and blood flow restricted, or the vessel can be tied off with a thread or bandage for firm compression. The area should also be covered with suitable medicated dressings that help restrict blood flow and kept in place using an elastic bandage or gauze wrap.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	The one who grants a decree of leniency and the establishment of rules does not confer them freely but according to causes of excuse or similarities.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Ms. May, if at any time you feel unwell and do not have immediate access to a doctor or medicine, please follow the guidance below on how to address the issue of this vein as mentioned above until professional help can be obtained, and understand that it is crucial for your safety to seek medical assistance:
Comensa la segonda partida.	Chapter Two begins with the introduction of a new character, James, who joins our protagonist on their journey to uncover hidden truths and find redemption. As they set off together, an air of uncertainty hangs over them like a thick fog. Despite being strangers just hours ago, there is an unspoken connection between them - a mutual understanding that something significant lies ahead.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Title: On Incision, Perforation, Vein Cutting, Phlebotomy, and Leeching Practices in Medicine
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are sentences from the Albucasis book.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	In the first chapter of this book, I have provided a comprehensive overview of all diseases in which burning has proven to be an appropriate and effective method for treatment, along with the occasions and causes for such treatments, as well as the necessary instruments and forms of cauterization. Furthermore, I have outlined the chapters pertaining to the use of caustic substances within wound care.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	The process of summoning in this court proceedings such that the plaintamo be thrown into the water at once for hours upon it that has requested. English translation.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Starting from the source water, cover, son of fire, tell me that in this chapter there is fear regarding water which exists in the first capital of sterilization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	E per aquo che cove che sia en lu gran cautela, quar in l'operace la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguades catso evacuacio la cual è am sanct am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio di la vena o incision suprà l'apostema o aperzo di exsitura o pur tia di purace di la plaga o extracziun di sageta o incisio di petra e a loro semblantz.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	E of those who are accompanied by fear and trembling, death comes upon them in their own houses. (Amos 5:18)
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Aye, I beseech thee that on thee may not fall the water in which thou dost abide, for certain times a plague of diseases shall come upon those who drink from evil wells.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	E of his lies about going to the bathroom and he is lying about her illness and she defies him with death, and so because of his vehement urge due to his own illness, and because of how long-lasting her illnss has been for him, she fears death which signifies mortality.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	The one who gives you life and speech, hoping for that health, thy illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	So then, let there be no doubt that you consent to the one of whom this manner is; and may your caution outweigh any covetousness, and your rapacity; and do not presume upon any cause without certain knowledge which verifies why you ought to do so, leading to commendable success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	We pray for you in the treatment of all your illnesses regarding prognosis and indication of the place where it is converted to health, that there is help provided by you to obtain fame and memory, gratitude, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, we beseech you to bless our minds with understanding and guide us in the right direction and protect us where ever you may be present. Amen.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	Chapter Distinguished for its Precedence in the Capitulary of Cauderies: The Treatebly Curative Measures Regarding Capsules and Scalpels, to be Used as Needed per Your Requests
Capitol primier.	First Edition.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	From the fluoride content in water, which is contained in children's teeth.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Aware that this disease causes waves in the infants, as soon as they are born and when the queen first sees their head during childbirth.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Some of the appeals are made due to an alleged cause that is unclear.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	In May children only get this disease; and in all those whom I have seen suffering from death, and therefore it seems to me a miserable work among them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	In those days it was known that there was a child whose head was completely filled with water, and his head was so magnificent in size that one could not fit anything inside due to its grandeur, and moreover the humidity grew within him until he met his death by fever.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	Is this moisture added from the gum to the bone or is it added underne cups on the cake?
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	In the case where the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the abscess is small, you should make incisions on the scalp at one location with a fissure along the latitude. The length of the fistula should be two inches within which runs the humidity, and this forms the shape of the spatulum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	If the humidity is increased and the abrasion is greater, then there are two cracks according to this method. In English: If the humidity increases and erosion intensifies, then there will be two fissures following this approach.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	Sì, se il sudore è ancora presente sul tuo viso, significa che potrestamo vedere le tue palpebre aperte completamente e l'acqua viene spinta quando comprimi la parte centrale del labbro superiore e non cade indietro nel tuo mento.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Explain that you are going to make three cracks in the head of this key according to this pattern:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	In the case of a spinal cord injury with swelling and hemorrhaging, it is essential to follow appropriate medical procedures for recovery and rehabilitation. This includes ensuring proper hydration; strengthening muscles, ligaments, and tendons through physiotherapy exercise; promoting blood flow by elevating the injured area above heart level during rest periods in the following days, and gradually reducing swelling while treating any bruising using appropriate creams or ointments; maintaining postural alignment to promote equal balance. Additionally, managing pain with a suitable diet that includes dry foods with low moisture content can help comfort and heal the affected area.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	E is an alternative method of incision that I consider appropriate for the size of the abscess and the collection of water, as sometimes it may occur more on the occipital region or in front, or on the right or left side; therefore, pay attention to where you make the incision so that the abscess and the repletion of water are addressed as much as possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	He noted that the artery does not separate blood vessels from tissue and may cause illness due to this flow of blood, which is responsible for the removal of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Capital II is the second studio album by American rock band, Flogging Molly. Released on October 10, 2004, through SideOneDummy Records and Vanguard Records, it marked their first major-label release after signing with them in August of that year. The album showcases a blend of traditional Irish music influences and punk rock energy, featuring songs about political issues, love, loss, and rebellion. Some of its notable tracks include "The Seven Deadly Sins," "Screaming at the Wailing Wall," and "Float." Capital II has been well-received by fans and critics alike for its raw emotion and powerful delivery.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the branching of the arteries that supply blood to the ears, called helixes.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Two: Understanding the Capital Structure of a Company
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	Quanto all'uso di cateteri o sondaggi come palloncini o piastre e il loro utilizzo obsoleto, non è consigliato somministrare le medicine attraverso queste vie, in quanto la terapia ricorrente potrebbe essere iniziata nel corso delle due settimane.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Therefore, he who wants to cut those trees infected by the disease must first clear any brush around them and then heavily prune the branches of the diseased tree; and carefully consider which part of the trunk is affected; and observe where each branch meets another before cutting. Also take into account how hidden or exposed they are, like in a forest with tall houses.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Passage on the archery art, and attempts to deduce each one from its unique features of every departure that comes in through the gates, and so for the latitude of the aim.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If it were to rupture, the clot would block the artery and detach itself from the plaques in the vessel walls.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	E is the length of the interval between two diastole sounds, four times when any vein becomes insufficient its blood lets out and pulsatile ejection, which jumps forth frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If Maya's archery bow does not fit on the chest, cover it with your hands for as long as you can measure three fingers' width of space and try to squeeebee in, then enter through the opening.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	"The amount of water that covers the Earth's surface is approximately 71%. This means around 361 million square kilometers (km²) out of a total surface area of about 510.1 million km², including land and oceans, are covered by water." The French text translates to English as follows: "And so it happens that the evil man gets his meat, and all because of the quantity which corresponds to the virtue of the illness and the relief of his choler."
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	The text appears to be in Romansh language, spoken primarily in the Swiss canton of Graubünden. After correcting for possible transcription errors and typos (which may occur due to the lesser global usage of this regional language), we could translate it as follows:
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	The medicinal plant has the properties of antispasmodics and diuretics, and also for use in cases where this is needed to heal wounds within the skin or fabric, and with care applied externeby those who are sick.
Capitol .iii.	The U.S. Capitol, also known as the "Capitol," is a historic building located in Washington D.C., United States of America. It serves as the home to the United States Congress, which includes both the Senate and the House of Representatives. Constructed between 1820 and 1863 with subsequent expansions, it was designed by Dr. William Thornton. The building is renowned for its neoclassical architectural style inspired by ancient Greek temples. Its distinctive features include a large central dome topped with the Statue of Freedom, as well as an iconic cast-iron gate known as the "Congr
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Removal of the arches which are within the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	Many people have emigrated from ancient lands to new territories for the purpose of seeking better agricultural conditions and improving their quality of life in temple-like structures; these buildings are akin to ancient strongholds, with solid appearances that remind one of those times. In addition, they serve as places where medical knowledge is practiced through healing arts like medicine and water therapy (hydrotherapy), which cannot be found elsewhere, especially when it comes to treating certain diseases.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of operation and extraction for those diseases that are caused by the evil race which resides in temples is as follows; understand archery apparent in temples because it has been shown to you with your palms, though only a few people know about it due to their strong willpower.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If you feel ill or have any discomfort, do not take strong medications; instead, try using one of these remedangs with warm water when the symptoms become apparent at your clinic:
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	English: The cat chased the mouse through the house until it finally caught its prey.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	To unlock the code and access the treasure chest, follow these steps:
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is very thin, it wraps around that of the elder's, and sharply divides from that one according to the quantity for which its extremities are lengthened, and there will be no blood flow because if they are not separated, all the blood from them cannot break out.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	A proper evacuation of the venous blood from the upper limb involves several steps and components working together to ensure efficient circulation. The process can be broken down as follows: Entró al tercer puesto.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the arcery is great, the hours it takes for you to achieve that in two locations with double or triple strength of cord and not causing decomposition before the solidification of the cliff and upwelling flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	In English, this phrase from Friulian can be translated as "The abundance between two harvests is lost and it occurs at that time or another." This refers to the concept of not taking full advantage of resources during periods of plenty, which could lead to scarcity later on.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish to perform a caustic procedure using a caustic agent or solution inside the mouth, please follow these steps and precautions carefully for safety and effectiveness:
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	F is better than G in that it causes fever or is related to scaling complexion; therefore cauterization may help with those conditions that lead to finishing moisture, and thus it is more useful in healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	A cover the extraction of teeth that fill this place with their ancient legacy, and stand tall over its dusty ground, while providing well-crafted medical remedaturers from dried herbs to ensure health and relief within their healing embrace.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	When the other healer arrives and notices a flow of blood from the wound, now you must take steps to stop that blood loss, either by applying pressure or using heat, and strengthen your mind knowing it will be stopped properly within a tight time frame.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If none of these causes exist at present - the hours pause your words about that place where the sun is setting, and enter the place with boiling water within which the motion ceases, and it becomes tight according to its kind.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	The fact that extracting blood through a vein is more effective than using this cautery with two tunnels is that you will cauterize the vein with a cauter having two openings, and then you have secured both locations, so whoever enters first ignites, entering which they arrive at the bone and split the vein in two places, to ensure it's elongated where those extremities are located, because they aren't completely united by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of a cautionary message or warning notice:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	Let e be the ratio of the slopes of the two lines given in examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the knife is dull like two blades are better, four times sharper than any cut, and does not injure the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	When there is any swelling, it means the heat of the fever lies in those areas and the flesh separates more easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is the best of all works and certainly deserves praise.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Let E be the area between two parallel plates with a thickness of S, where S is the distance between them.
Capitol quart.	In English, "Capitol Quart" refers to a group of four singers who perform together as one musical ensemble. The term can be applied to various types of vocal groups such as a barbershop quartet or even classical music singers specializing in performing pieces from the Capitol Records catalogue.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Treatment of sharp and sour taste deficits in wine.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	In cases where acid tears are present, and it is the course of those veins which lie on the forehead area without causing any medical conditions or reasons for worry, sometimes the face becomes reddened and feels a sense of restlessness as if it were driven by ants, with the follicles so exhausted that even their hairs have become known to them, and the pores scraped by the acidity of tears, old wounds aggravated in the cure of these operations, with none being able to spare such a condition.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	C is an ancient healing ritual in which you command the evil to leave through spoken words on your forehead, and then make three vertical cuts across your forehead according to its length. This practice is believed by some cultures to release negative energy or banish illnesses. However, it's important to note that this ritual could be potentially harmful and should not be attempted without proper guidance from a trained practitioner in the cultural tradition of interest.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	It is the length of the tear ducts (canaliculi) that differ depending on their location: one follows the length of the nose in its middle section at the front, while another aligns with the movement of the eyelids, which are located near it. The third one differs from both these directions.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	A is watching the beginning of your arches which are wide open and elongate his mouth from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	C is the space in which any incision involves three stitches.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	Is it an unpleasant situation involving sponges or fabrics that dry out and cause wounds to the blood?
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	A proper anatomical metaphor for the sharpness of two extreme points could be "the edge of a razor blade." This implies that there is a very fine line or distinction between them. Here's how it might look in English using this metaphor:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	In the second stanza of "Canto General" by Pablo Neruda, lines are recited as follows:
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	The task is to reverse the words between two given indices and then return the entire reversed string. Here's an example in Python code:
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	The Cretan lyre is a stringed musical instrument that originates from Crete and was used in Ancient Greece as well. It consists of a wooden box with strings stretched over it and played by plucking the strings, usually using fingers or a plectrum. It is sometimes referred to as a harp-lyre hybrid due to its appearance.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	First, carefully remove the sharp edge of that knife and detach it from its handle, then insert the blade of the lion's knife into the bone, and push through until you reach the crack in the joint. Finally, separate all the tendons as they descend from the head to the hips.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	The water should continue to flow from the source and be directed into one crack through another adjacent crack.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Then write down the quantity of blood cells obtained and express in liters the location of the bleeding sources within the body.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	In every crack and crevice of this old wall, dust particles dance in the morning light and lingering air, while I pause to ensure none will form an unwanted stain.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	E is the third day after surgery provides great relief of thirst and fatigue, and one should drink water with basil infusion or rose petals to help heal wounds and other affected areas.
Capitol .v.	In the context of United States government and politics, "Capitol" refers to a building or complex that houses the legislative body of the country'amoon. The most notable example is the United States Capitol in Washington D.C., which serves as the home for both chambers of Congress: the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	From the cure of wounds and its effects on the descendants of those parts mentioned in Chapter One.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	Many patients who undergo surgical treatment for varicose veins and continue with proper care experience relief from the symptoms of their condition, as well as improvement in swelling and ulcerated eyelids due to skin changes, accompanied by acute pain at the forehead above the incision site, which is a common outcome of such procedures. The materials and cataracts are not derived from large veins originating within the body but rather involve smaller vessels affected in these areas.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure in this case is to command the evil spirit to touch your forehead, and then quickly insert a small needle through that area of your forehead into the skull. Start with the left temple piercing it until you reach the right temple; let the needle go deep into the bone where these temples are located. Then remove the needeen from both temples as they should be warding off the evil spirit, and this action will cure it.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	The exsiccata is applied to the wound or absorbed between the two lips of the slit or the dressing sheets using an adhesive bandage.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	A newly developed product prevents the formation of harmful pollutants in the air and also does not cause any skin irritation or allergic reactions.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	Evan's drainage aquo and vases that the swelling has diminished, hours cover that you use le ointment which commences in lu next to your heart, and as if you take flour of wheat two portions and four portions of camphor and mix them together, then knead a paste with it and apply it on these patches over the meat native.
Capitol .vi.	Capital V (CAPITOL VI) is the sixth studio album by American singer, songwriter and actress Dolly Parton. It was released on September 10, 1amoy29 1974 through RCA Victor Records. The album consists of ten tracks, all written or co-written by Dolly herself.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Treatment of water in the pipes.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Cattails are a type of plant that resemble reeds or rushes and can grow in various environments such as marshes, ponds, lakes, and other wetlands. They have a distinctive appearance with tall stalks and brown cylindrical flower spikes at the top. The leaves often form an umbrella-like shape over water bodies where they thrive. Cattails are known for their versatility as they can survive in both freshwater and brackish environments, similar to how iron or copper behave like metals while also being flexible like water or honey, and even resemble certain animals due to the presence of insects on them.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	So let the pebble in the ear seemingly come from other causes that don't fit or believe in the ear, and shake the ear with sunlight, and sometimes when seen the stone, it distills into such a cause of olivine oil or lemonade, and then administers the extraction therefrom, and induces sneezing under certain conditions, and prevents nasal obstruction in case of sneeze occurrence.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	The earlobe occasionally forms small patches of skin tags or warts and tends to hang down at the sides, which is often due to these reasons.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If not taken out, the hours distribute extraction of his own musical instrument named after a subtle gesture known as episodic. This is its form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is a foreground task, then yes, I'll focus on that first; if not, the hours will be dedicated to extracting its subtle but essential details through minimal doubling.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	If not a foam earplug, use an earwax removal tool to gently insert the tip into your ear canal and carefully close around the tool with wax-removing cerumen cera and oil softener so that it is not too bulky but just enough for the plug.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	A prop extrats, am levant al vent amb força atacant, quar tropes es vagades cum aqua que han comptat. (Catalan)
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If May is not fitted with these glasses (i.e., reading glasses or bifocals), she will need to hold the book closer to her eyes or use an assistive device, such as a stand-up magnifier, in which case she places a small amount of paste on one end of the ray and properly adjusts it at the extremity, then neatly wraps it around that area.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	An otoscope is an instrument that enters the ear canal to help visualize it, and removes excess moisture from the ear.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	If not, then in cases where all the causes we have recounted are not present, there may be times when one experiences such symptoms as an outbreak or spasm due to other reasons. These could include stress, tension, certain medical conditions, and more. It is always best to consult with a healthcare professional for proper diagnosis and treatment if you experience any concerning symptoms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	In the manner of cutting this wart that you have just blessed with the malady of venous and extravasation, according to the method of its virtue, carefully cut out the lesion with your hands and redirect it towards its edges; then convert the earlobe by making a small incision at the site where the gland has been prematurely developed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	E be the crack in the moonlit figure that reaches the stone, and when the stone is overturned, use there an instrument appropriate; and with care apply this crack at that moment with velocity, and while it remains within until healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of the pain in your ear is one of the greases that you consumed and swallowed, it will eventually heal itself or come out on its own; however, if you do not pay attention to your condition, it may lead to a more subtle complication over time following this pattern:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	He removed the earring that he had put on his earlobe.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	E is the water that you think has become humid due to the warmth of the air, and rests in little mounds, or by delicate action or from sheer coincidence as we say, it's been extracted already.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	The text appears to be in Catalan, and it translates roughly to the following in English: "Mays when he enters the water that is inserted into the ear canal from which evil uses its sneezing as a condition at the beginning, and fills up his entire ear with warmth, and then pours over that same ear where the water is, if through this it is expelled, well; but if not, numerous rocks and lions according to the length of what was said come forth from there, and he places those in a fire briefly, and the patient inserts one of them into his ear canal and strikes upon another rock over the first one lying within that part of the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not cease, but instead be like a rock within that all the water has flowed over - remain steadfast and unwaired.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	The water should not be taken directly from the source, but instead transferred to a container such as paper or glass. The English translation of the Occitan text is as follows: "He took a small piece of lead in his ear and extended the other end, which was red-hot, to burn it." This refers to an old method used by doctors called cauterization, where they would use heat from a heated metal object, such as a piece of lead, to stop bleeding or prevent infection.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	E prop met i autre goc en altre goc e fai aqüotantas vegades que tot l'aigua sigui foratjada, i estratz aquel amb una canella així com d'abans es diu de la pedra extraesoradora.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of meat entering into that earhole, if it's a small amount, so much more plentiful and similar, according to what we have mentioned in the division; but if it's of great quantity causing discomfort at the site of insertion, one should allocate hours for the extraction of such objects and onces (units), and its cause is far less likely compared to all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	Maintain the extraction of wormwood in the ear, when you treat that warm water we have mentioned in the division and in the treatise on distillations do not apply your treatment, cover it with hours as you watch the sunlight hitting the ear.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If there is any cause related to worms in this case, it may be due to certain factors or circumstances that occurred previously, although subtle. However, if no such cause can be identified, the condition might involve a narrow and slightly less than normal passageway, which could manifest as follows:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	E place the subtle extremity in the ear according to the quantity that one usually suffers from the illness; and pull it gently at first, then stronger, until all the worms are out (evacuated).
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If Mays does not follow the instructions provided for using the canula cera (candle), he should place it in the circuit as previously described; then administer distillates such as those that have been used in the treatment of worms, and you will find information on the use of distillates in this section.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here is the translation of your text in English:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	There lies a silver or golden coin in the narrow passage, within which is a small trap, and it is placed upside down.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	Therefore, it is crucial to understand the concept of continental drift here as well.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the top of your head where the pain is located; then gently insert some oil or decoction of herbs, water from any medicinal plants, into a small tube - which would be in the earlobe. Then carefully introduce the ray at the spot just above the discomfort and squeeze it to release the applied remedy inside the hollow of the ear while feeling the relief as the oil is dispensed.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	The apple that is hidden in the ear is already touched by a small flame.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	Take care that the cause which led you to pierce your ear is not too severe, for ear medications cannot tolerate water.
Capitol .vii.	Act III, Scene i of William Shakespeare's play "Julius Caesar" is a pivotal scene in the plot and explores themes such as power, loyalty, and betrayal. The title refers to the setting at the Roman Capitol where several significant events take place that drive the narrative towards its tragic climax.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	The care of the olive plantation.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some blows to the ear can result from childbirth of non-ruptured uterus in women, and it may also occur spontaneously in men. This accumulation sometimes leads to a condition called cholesteatoma located at the base of the ear canal or behind the eardrum without causing perforation; this accumulation occasionally results from damage to the skin lining of the ear canal with no actual tear, and it can also happen outside (beyond) these areas.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	From the realm of dreams, where comprehension fails, arise major difficulties in achieving sound health.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	En esta situaturas em que conseguimos relax, tomemos las orejas de los problemas y miramos hacia el sol.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If you encounter a seemingly empty space, it's likely due to the subtle vortices of energy that exist within it. This is the form of an unseen dimension.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the forearm is in such a position where its laterality (left or right) makes one side acute and the other not, and it has two clavicle bones on each side that do not make an angle with the earlobe, then we can consider this to be the left arm.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	If the octopus is cooked in its own skin or in the shell of its flesh, then subtle and gentle knife cuts will showcase the meat'easy-to-prepare nature.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	To warm up your ear before wearing headphones, gently rub the outside of your ear with your fingertips until it feels slightly warmed by the friction and then place the earbuds in the desired position inside your ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	If you have an earache due to water that is causing the pain, it may be helpful to try leaning forward with your head down while squeezing out the water from your ears for relief; however, be careful not to strain or damage your auditory nerves.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A prop of the ear drops in the direction opposite to the amount of fat you have incorporated into the Egyptian emulsion; and do this for about ten days so that it will be sure to consolidate the plaque; or take some (drops) and put them in a glass, pulverize over your head three times, then use these drops. And if at times you see the ear becoming swoleback, take away the previous substance and replace with another one that is wrapped in cotton which has been made of olive oil or rose water; continue this until it heals completely.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Mays decides to alleviate his blood flow by submerging a sponge or rag in running water and placing it on his forehead for a while, then using the other remedy that restricts the blood flow, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	In the English language, "Capitol" is a word that refers to a building where a legislative body meets. The most famous example of this is the United States Capitol in Washington D.C., which houses both chambebts of Congress - the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	The curare plant, from which the poison is derived, affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	In some dogs' eyelids, there is no sweat gland present, while in others, it may be vestigial or even completely absent.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then let you know those who have had the chance, and separated from their relatives, pause upon the places they left three years ago.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	May suffer from a blood clot, which can be treated by making minor incisions and using tiny cauterizing tools.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best hemostasis method is to apply pressure as soon as bleeding and injured troops return from their missions; if the wounds are then cauterized while still hot, those injuries will be sealed and won't reopen.
Capitol .ix.	Ix Capital is a fictional entity that could be used in various forms of creative media, such as books, films, or video games. It might represent a powerful financial institution or corporation within the narrative. If you're creating a story or concept and you want to use "Capitol .ix." as a name for an establishment, here is how it could be introduced:
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	The great eye disease that comes to the eyelids of humans.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	In the eyes of some people, there exists an overpowering reason for their strong and resilient nature; this is often referred to as greatness.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	A: Heavy moisture accumulation on the lower edges and underside of eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	In my opinion, the operational hours of the hospital should be extended if there is an increase in demand for health services. The reason behind this decision may not necessarily be easy or universally agreed upon by all parties involved, but it can address a variety of issues such as overcrowding and wait times.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Go back over that large crack in the wall and grab onto it tightly. Pull yourself across the entire distance as easily as possible to escape, then let go of one end and break off a piece.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	May's eye does not appear to be inflamed at the start and it doesn't seem like they are experienncing any piercing of the eyelid margin in small amounts, however hours ago there was something that might have caused this without them knowing.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, adjust your stitches accordingly and ensure that it heals properly within.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If little remains of him, you will not suffer any harm from that anger which he leaves behind and embodies anew.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the greatness is diminishing from the parts of the upper eyelid's surface, it causes the lid to droop and lose its fullness on one side, leading you to notice another beginning point; pull that point throughout the whole eyelid, and if the upper eyebrow appears elongated without any apparent cause, then so be it.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	A proper beginning is like starting with fresh saltwater; and caring for the container that holds it until it is cleaned.
Capitol .x.	Capitol Records is an American record label established in Hollywood, California, by Johnny Mercer, Buddy DeSylva and Glenn Wallichs on March 27, 1ebx, 1942. It was the first West Coast-based record label of note in the United States. Capitol initially released records using the unique Liberty Studios recording system invented by conductor and recording engineer Lloyd Dunn; it was most famous for its production process which used high-quality studio musicians instead of major name bands, such as Benny Goodman's or Artie Shaw's, whose "name value" commanded a premium even though their recordings were generally no better than the Capitol studio musicians.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From the curling of the eyelid below the lash line.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axciophtalmia is an eye condition that originates in the glands of the upper and lower eyelids, primarily occurring during childhood, aggravating those with cataracts, causing them to be unable to tolerate sunlight due to tearing.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	E per to times they jest about their foreheads all the time, and when they sleep, you can see the traces of moisture on their eyelids which had previously concealed fatigue and weariness; as soon as your hand touches them, a sense of affectionate warmth is evident in those eyes.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	In any method of operation where the illness affects your head or body and causes discomfort to you, it is appropriate that a poultice be applied directly on the affected area according to the quantity that contains all necessary ingredients, ensaturated with your own words as needed. The poultice should then be spread over the entire circle, and appropriately placed in the middle of that circle where humidity has seeped through a fissure not larger than the one created during flaubotomy (a surgical procedure for removing bone fragments or foreign objects from the cranial cavity).
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In Mays, you must make a hole that allows the entire thread to pass through so that it reaches your loom as soon as possible; otherwise, in case of delay or absence, there may be processing issues at your destination, following the form of white silk.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Without exception, here are the drops that I have involved in my words about the departments of France and which are dispersed between my left and right hand when it is spread out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	He watches to make sure you don't adjust in the crack, because if I leave without stepping on it, I won'ebbe reached that wall and fallen down there.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If May'n't meet your enemy at the start of the crevice, then you must adjust in the crevice a small opening that facilitates their process; and proceed accordingly as we have said; and proceed underwater with towels of wool on them for warmth and pause there while breathing through the mouthpiece.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	S: The hygroscopic material that absorbs water from the atmosphere through its pores, resulting in increased moisture content within itself.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	B) A person who acts in good faith within the scope of their authority is protected.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Maya decides to go to the local pharmacy, then applies the cream she bought there once it has dried, hoping that will make her skin better.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI: The Capital City
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	The matter of the issue at hand.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	In the case of goats, if you remove too many natural and old hairs from their eyelids to replace them with artificial ones, it may lead to various diseases such as persistent tearing and softening of the skin around the eyes, which can cause damage known as trichiasis. There are four ways to treat this condition:
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Hence know that you must close your eyes in your left hand; and if it turns, be; otherwise, insert a needle into the one where the eye's nerve is located on its upper edge, and make the needle penetrate upwards, so that it reaches near to the margin of the eyelid from which hair grows - close to the hair follicles - then pull the needle towards you along the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	In the anatomy of the eye, on its inner part near the edge of the eyelid folds are attached the spots of the tear ducts belonging to the lacrimal sac; externally from below it sprinkles petty dots or streaks over the eyelashes and then covers the eyebrow, making a pattern resembling the leaf of a myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, let'amo note that the shape of the eyelid can vary according to the amount of drooping, which is diverse in men as there are those among them who require an incision from the eyelid for a large quantity depending on the amount by which the eyelid is tightened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Apertum inam suam partem super duae lineae quae audivisti, et initium lacrimalis maioris intra lacrimalem minorem.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	Your crack is as natural as the roughness of kings, too.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Here is the English translation of your text:
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Properly stitch the wound within three to four days or as soon as possible. This will help reduce scarring and promote faster healing. Make sure to keep the area clean and dry before sewing it up. Additionally, take any prescribed medications to prevent infection and aid in recovery. Always follow your healthcare provider's instructions for wound care.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If the lid is loose and there are gaps in it, let them close the gap with stitches and treat that area which has dried out and contracted; for the eyelid being raised should be sealed and joined by sutures, but also use an adhesive tape as follows.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, his only concern is about the illnesses, and he does good works, and it's not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	E is a distinctive mask, and it features patterns similar to the leaves of myrtle on its surface. As you lift each eye with three small pivots, they move accordingly in this manner: when you raise one part of the eyelid, another descends simultaneously, creating an intricate dance that reflects the elegant design of the mask.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible here, have the units (assuming you're referring to measurements) and where there is no discrepancy, place a needle in such way that it has filaments on both sides, and insert one of them into the lacrimal gland. Then adjust the second filament so that they are at an equal distance from each other. Elevate according to their corresponding elevation points. Reread everything as necessary to ensure accuracy.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A approaches to adjust the two lips of the patient using stitches and then cure whatever is within that has been healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you have an abscess or a boil, apply the warm compress and a similar dressing, as well as some antibiamoletto.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Some eyelids are inverted towards the eyebrow where their hairs have been transformed, hence you should use in that of water we mentioned earlier for cleansing; however, stitch it up if necessary (in case of any surgical or medical intervention).
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Una taxi driver is a person who drives passengers in their own personal vehicle or works for a transportation company. They usually pick up and drop off people at various locations, such as airports, hotels, businesses, or requested destinations. Taxi drivers often have extensive knowledge of the local area, which helps them provide efficient service to customers.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	In the following step, you should convert your eyelid and split the figure according to what I have described; then, along with artful skill, create cannons or subtle beams whose length is in accordance with the length of the eyebrow and the width corresponds to the breadth of its space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	He has cut off the ends of both pieces, so you have no threads left.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	In order to add a certain subtlety underwater that may be lacking in the hue of some strokes, and thicken the canes from various parts with a firmer structure, leave it alone for several days so that the tendon associated with this structure weakens and deteraturated, and eventually breaks down within itself. This way, when you work on the canvas again, its texture will be more suitable to your touch.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If he was late, the hours became shorter for him until he arrived, and as soon as he entered the plane, he felt better.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	It seems like you're describing a condition related to the eyelid being swol cued (solidified) and it is raised, with hairs not growing properly. However, without more information or context about your symptoms and medical history, I can't provide an accurate diagnosis.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	Here is a recipe for making delicious cornbread, which you will make following these steps:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	The measure of the length and latitude without miles or meters.
Capitol .xii.	Capital XIII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	The rise of pointed fangs when the skin turns blue indicates a cold sensation.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	There are several essential oils with strong and sharp, yet pleasant fragrances that can be used for relaxation when blended properly in the right proportions. These include lavender oil, peppermint oil, eucalyptus oil, chamomile oil, bergamot oil, lemon balm oil, clary sage oil, and ylang-ylang oil.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	Let e be the length of fields corresponding to quantities in a unit called "palm."
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	A proper approach to another subtle field would be to carefully analyze and understand the core concepts before delving deeper into their intricaamoines. Then you can apply your knowledge to grasp its complexities fully, using examples or analogies if helpful. Remember that learning is a process of continuous exploration and discovery, so don't hesitate to ask questions and seek clarification as needed. Good luck on your journey!
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	A) Do not be distracted in your work and let the sunlight shine upon you so that your task may be proclaimed, for it is a subtle and intricate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	A) Carefully insert the needle into the edge of the adjusted eyelid which requires an eye pincers, and make sure that it penetrps through the eyelashes immediately as you extract the excess natural lash.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Article XII - Distribution of Property among Heirs and No More than Three Shares
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	A: To properly apply your mascara, begin by ensuring that the wand is not excessively clumped with product; remove any unnecessary amounts on a tissue or wipe it clean. Holding the brush vertically, start at the base of your lashes and wiggle slightly as you move towards the tips to coat each lash evenly. It's essential to let the first layer dry before applying another one for optimal results. Aim not to pump the wand in and out of the tube as it introduces air, which causes mascara to dry up faster.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Mays, it's better to forgive and forget the past mistakes, as you have composed your trust in her from the beginning until now, despite any previous betrayals by her side faithful friend.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	In the Eve of Holy Week (Maundy Thursday), you should fast until midnight and then eat bread and drink wine without salt for three days, during which time your flesh is sore but holy, and over this good body you shall find peace in that place.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is shorter than your natural hair length, you should add an extension that matches your natural hair color and style it as desired. If you want to make it longer, you can incorporate multiple extensions until you reach the desired length. Then, style your hair accordingly.
Capitol .xiii.	XIII is the Roman numeral that corresponds to the Arabic number 13 in English. The term "capitol" generally refers to a building where a legislative assembly, such as Congress in Washington D.cuC, meets. When combined with the Roman numeral for 13 (XIII), it may refer to something specifically related to that particular session or aspect of government represented by the number XIII, but without further context, its exact meaning is unclear.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Regarding the care to prevent the appearance of bags under your eyes, here are some tips in English and Spanish:
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	He goes to the eye specialist for an examination of his entropion or involution, which is the contraction of the eyelid that turns either towards the right or left side, due to poor wound healing or scarring or cauterization, and it's called a lazy eye (amblyopia). This condition can be natural or acquired, formed through scar tissue from injury or surgery, or similar issues.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The way of the operation in this case is to make an incision on that consolidation and separate the lips of you, and pause there in such a place where it's between those two bones, and tie them together so they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	E in the cove where you use as a remedy for various causes that dry up, strengthen it. However, if you make this return to excessive alcohol consumption at any time may cause more harm than good.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	For the condition that requires soothing relief and is caused by fenugreek, and where you should boil water in which a teaspoamo of fennel seeds are added, or use Aqua Dulcis (water with honey), make it liquid if necessary, then immerse your hands in this mixture and apply to the affected area.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The key principle of my therapy is that you must do all exercises with the correct form as they were initially taught to you.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation we have referred to is simply a correction of alchemy that does not restore the original form according to its nature in front.
Capitol .xiiii.	Title Page (Capitalization):
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment for amblyopia, which is applied to the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This is called an eyelash false (falsa pestaña in Spanish), which is really a type of artificial eyelash; and it can be either naturally sourced or synthetically made.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May's accidental is a fault caused by slipping, falling or burning, or other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The procedure of this surgery is that you must take a double-pointed needle and keep it in the incision on your skin, then pass it from the left tear duct into the right tear duct, enscuentro que el hilo llega a las dos extremidades de la arnilla.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	B) Extends above the parts beyond the wheel and then curves to follow that curve of the wheel, with sides expanding outwards to form a wide shape.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	So if you take the figure of the eye as it is now, yes; otherwise, grab the ray and place it along that split in the figure, then rotate the other to transform the two gaps into a straight line at the edge of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The ratio of the areas between two cracks (faults) on a section of rock such that they intersect at right angles and their resulting figure when they converge is formed by the faults.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	No, the figure you mentioned "landa" is not a Greek letter. It seems there might be some confusion or typo in your message. The Greek alphabet includes letters like Alpha (Α), Beta (Β), Gamma (Γ) etc., but there'amo no 'landa'. Please double-check and provide the correct information if you are asking about any other specific Greek letters.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Certain the flesh that is left of your late grandfather's property shall be distributed according to this will after his eyes have been closed with a bandage.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Approach the separated parts and those in the lain of wool; approach cures those who have spoken of the soothing medicines and calcines within which are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If the eyelashes are inserted through a crack or suture that has been cauterized, wait for a few hours before laying flat over the eyelid skin as instructed.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	A is the vowel that separates "la" from "calguaire" between the lips as they have been pronounced.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the making of the salve for alchemy when it is defused or left behind, that flows in its operation according to how it has been prepared from the alchemical method, and this takes on a form of diverse drops.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The craftsmen should be aware of the optimal times to prepare an incision in any manner which is possible within the time frame before the figure returns to its natural, or at least close to that state; and according to that, what ailment it may suit for the operation and tools used as well as their arrangement.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	From the attachment of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	This consolidation shall be performed on individuals who have a solidified eyelid and whose freedom of movement as well as their natural actions are limited; therefore you must interfere with the external part of the ray above the eyelebag, or elevate/extend it up to the bony landmarks.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	T'approach to the incision site with a subtle adhesion that is not sharpened by incisions; have an obtuse small tool at hand so that the malady does not disturb your procedure, and maintain the adhesion so it doesn't slip due to its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	S is your medical condition, which involves the inability of the eyelid to return to its natural shape and fully heal the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Pour purifier votre eau salée et la rendre buvable, vous pouvez utiliser les deux méthodes suivantes :
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Eversion is the medical term that separates between the eyelid and the fluid buildup in the eye, and rests over the cornea infusing it with a saline solution, and eventually uses conservative treatabal methods until it heals after three days.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI (Capitol) is the title of a section or chapter within an English text, typically indicating that it focuseby some authors as the sixteenth part of their work in chronological order or by importance. The specific content would depend on the context and subject matter of the overall document. For example, if this were part of a history book discussing ancient Rome, Chapter XVI might detail aspects related to the Roman Capitolium or Capitoline Hill where temples dedicated to Jupiter Optimus Maximus stood.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	The inspection of the eyelid and tear duct prominence.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	I understand that unguentum is of two kinds, one nervous and appears subtly fluid; the other non-nervous resembles a white creamy consistency when touched, which if it adheres to you quickly becomes absorbed and does not remain on your skin.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	The symptoms of dry eye syndrome do not become noticeable until the tear production is insufficient enough that it gradually starts to affect vision and limits light perception and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	Mays may lay his hand upon your head in the belief that this malaise will take its hold in your mind, and he carefully touches your forehead, then raises one of your eyelids slightly while pressing his own thumb near to it, before slowly extending it towards the temples.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	A prop of the needle pricks into that of a horse or sheep or cow or similar object or fortified door, it duplicates its extremity little by little and becomes in the middle of the hinge, and penetrates therein with the needle, and grips the eyelet with the needle; and extends from there to the sides, and scrapes off all the lashing of the eyelet which closed it.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	Assisi follows that path leading up to the hill behind you.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	"Approaches to drainage within the realm of tearful drama include the subtle use of tears or small instruments, and creating a path for the natural lacrimal fluid when it doesn't flow on its own."
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Certainly! Here is the translation you requested from Catalan to English: "In some cases, roots grow on the ground where they have spread or aimed. As we have said, and approaching their course like this: a lion." This sentence seems to be describing how roots behave similarly to a languid animal's pathway (like that of a lion).
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	B) Do not touch the lens of the eye or cause it to break and that the iris is punctured.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Sprinkle the ground with a bit of salt or grains from your own chaff and let it sit for one day; then pour hot water over that into another container, and after some time that liquid will be healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nerve is not inflamed and you cannot insert the needle, nor stay in that place for a while, this type of glue can be cured with medications, and it heals just like I do and reiterate in the section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to dissect that poem and examine its themes of bad times and the subtle fierce lion of enthusiasametimes following this form, here's a breakdown:
am subtilitat.	A subtlety is a clever or intricate detail, aspect, or approach that may not be immediately obvious but can have significant influence or effect when understood and applied properly. In literature, film, art, and other creative mediumebts, subtleties are often used to convey deeper meanings or evoke certain emotions in the audience. They require careful observation and interpretation to fully appreciate their impact.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	Once, when it is rare and exotic and brought to that place, the hours distill from your hour in the heat of chief fault of signal or an chief rock or an salt stream, and fills up with heat into the other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	E - It is better to treat within the time limit that it takes for relief to occur rather than waiting until inflammation becomes established in the joint; then it may take much longer for it to heal, and one must begin treatment at the onset of symptoms.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Here is the corrected version in English according to the given instruction: "Please correct your operation within that range which should be sane."
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	In the event of a tear duct blockage, if symptoms are severe, it should be considered for surgical intervention; and only that one portion is incised, without extending to areas where additional tear production may occur.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	A prop distilled in the tear duct is called tears and are formed as part of the body's immune response when there is an irritant present or to protect against bacterial infeeby lubricating the surface of the eye and flushing away foreign substances.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII: The Capital City
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	The dream of becoming an astronaut and the water that emerged from boiling meat in the pot.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some cataracts in the eyes of old age are formed from clumped or cloudy protein, which is deposited over the pupil and may bulge above the eyelids, causing them to thicken so much that they almost meet across the fornix, creating a fringe-like appearance similar to a balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	Mays's operation is that he places his hand on yours; and then works the threads of that flesh and collects all that meat conveniently at a certain point, and with that point uses either forceps or tweezebrushes; and proceeds to incise until everything is finished inside where you started, while being careful not to damage the thread you've been working on.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	E is the your design which contains those elements that we have reported in the discussion of the glaze, or small pincers by means of which you will shape the ashboard according to how this form arrivebles with this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Your recipe has been successfully completed and I'm glad to tell you that the entire mixture of salt water is ready now, or else let it drip into your powdered rosemary jar (or other container), which resembles a storage place for such medicinal ointments. Lastly, apply it over the affected area with an almond oil-based cream, making sure that any wound infection is covered to prevent further irritation or contam
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any cause of inflammamo or the lord's serf suffers from an ulcer and has an abscess with pus, then apply hot water to the abscess several times a day until it drains, and afterwards cover it with a bandage during healing. Similarly treat any other wounds in the same manner as described above for this type of inflammation.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, do not use any creams or treatments to cure all forms of ringworm, whether naturally occurramo d accidentally caused; apply heat instead and do not put the ointment on any area where you see that part is undergoing this treatment.
Capitol .xviii.	XVIII is the Roman numeral that represents the number 18 in English. In this context, it could refer to a chapter or section of a document titled "Capitol," such as Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Collection of threads in the wheel.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Which torts can you sue regarding the breach and preventing me from carrying out my work, as well as extending its duration in days?
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	It is necessary for you to consider if the color in which it is known is strong and not another illness that makes you see it, so carefully observe what you think you know.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	E is that you command the malady to pause its course in your veins, and bring about a subtle transformation once or twice at your discretion. This shall be done according to this formula:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Two prominent artists in the world of contemporary art are Ai Weiwei and Banksy. These individuals have made significant contributions to the art scene with their provocative works that often touch upon social, political, and cultural issues. Their unique styles and bold expressions have captivated audiences globally, leading them to become influential figures within modern-day artistry.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	The veins gradually dilate and become more subtle as the gentle flow of blood continuously washes them clean from within, while they grow thicker and are constantly refreshed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	E watch that you do not lead your feet astray on the sands; and if your work is in front of the sun during the day, and your fatigue does not cause only those veins to appear.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	As the hours pass by, your essence becomes like green or red wine, so that your vitality may erode the water you have gained from the soil.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Mays si el agua no es una posible solución para tu problema en ese momento, y las horas siguientes también intentarás aplicar totalmente el agua sobre el área donde sientes dolor. Déjalo reposar allí durante varios días hasta que se alivie el dolor y te asegures de evitar cualquier infección cutánea.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	A) It goes over the second that the Messenger entered who was to be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	Yes, here is an explanation in English of what a fern is and its typical shape or form.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX: The Legislative Process in the U.S. Congress
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	The decrease of aridity in the area.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	In the case of arsenical wounds or acute inflammamoinal conditions that are not healing after being preceded by such descriptions, do not use them but instead perform an incision over the abscess when it matures and remove all moisture within it as well as any pus entering which is revealed to be bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then comes the bone exposed to decay and darkness; now your race will form a structure of which this is the shape: (bone-like sculpture or artwork depicting human evolution)
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	E is an extremely sharp knife, and it is made of iron or steel, and its edge has been honed in such a way that it can be pointed with a limestone or diamond for finer sharpening (as shown in the following form):
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Pause on that rust spot over your roof and slowly scrape it off with your little tool until you know the rust is completely gone.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Aqueous extracts can be used to make certain remedies and as an adjunct restores the dry locations caused by dehydraturative and styptic factors.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the location is consolidated and well-healed bone with a detached piece of skin and the wound has not reopened for forty days, without reinfection or inflammamo(inflammation) occurring at the site, then you should know that it's healing.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	E iso, as hours shall not be in lieu of surgery but rather to reduce the fissure to its natural shape: and according to this method, you will expose it from side to side with either a metal or acupuncture needle, and then follow these steps during treatment:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The adjacent side of the right triangle is extended and its base is lengthened to the same extent at the vertex just like before.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	In that particular area above the eyes and near the lacrimal glands, extend your hand a little towards the upper part of your forehead, then roll your hand into the triangle formed by those areas where it fully penetrates through the skull bones. That will cause the pain you feel as hot air escapes from there when you breathe.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	I will restore the old medicine cabinets with such creativity that you'll be amazed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Thus from the flesh and the place it was stored, the matter that dispersed into separate parts returns to us again; therefore this makes the illness more credible.
Capitol .xx.	Capital cities are the political and administrative centers of countries, hosting government buildings and often playing a significant role in cultural life as well. Here's a list of some capital cities around the world:
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Descent of the Humeral Eminence (from Latin 'eminentia humeri' - elevated or projecting part of the upper arm bone) refers to a condition where there is an abnormal downward movement or displacement in this region, which could be due to trauma, injury, or certain medical conditions. It affects shoulder joint stability and function.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	The healing power of plants is at its full potential and does not cause any harm or loss, which brings health to the sick ones, follows it, and pauses during windy weather in order to scarify and soak for good nourishment; and pause over the liquid liniment made from acacia and aloe, ointments and creams, and strengthen the incubation with powdered pollen.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method of the dusts involves taking four pieces from each lion'n's cloth and doubling them; then using those doubled pieces to create a pattern or design.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	B) Placing them on top of each grocery item according to the quantity needed.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Apply strong pressure over those areas prone to hardness; and rotate the suction cups rhythmically as if performing skin exfoliation; then apply these suction cups firmly against the skin, leaving them in place both during the day and at night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	During the heating season, the air becomes more humid and moisture can become stagnant.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	The party moved on to the day and night as they had previously discussed.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the eye'e glaucoma has been reduced, then he is okay, and if not, let the treatment continue with drops for the particles and the strain and the pressure inside that are healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI: The Role of the US Congress in Shaping Foreign Policy
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	From the edge of the choroidal elevation in the vascular layer of the eye.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	A disruption in the uveal tunic can lead to prolapse of structures outward from the eyelids as if under a slight weight, and the eye's shape becomes hollowed; thusly you will need to incise it. The surgical procedure is performed such that you introduce the needle into the edge of the uvea on the side where structures are protruding, then pass the needle through its double layer at halfway point, and allow the first needle to follow according to its placement; next insert the second needle through the double-layered site you've just created and elevate that part of the uvea into the syringe's channel. Strengthen this motion with it.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	The ancient art of winemaking involves the harvest and resting period for grapes infused in barrels of oak and linen within which the wine matures as it ferments through its journey from grape to glass.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	A proper diet with enough water that supports the healing within which the pain is alleviated.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Several veins unite from all sides at the base of the circle of cloth within the deep indentation, and each appropriately perforates through the subtle spatula reaching to the core of the depression, with its moisture running down into the albuginea, and then descending in haste.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	A proper diet is essential to maintain good health.
Capitol .xxii.	Act I, Scene i
De curacio de alconati.	The Curia of Alconada.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called Alzheimer's is nothing more than the illness which resembles water running downhill and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Mays, your body works in such a way that if you make the unhealthy habit of sitting on an improperly arranged and uneven chair, it will tend towards your spine. Therefore, ensure its alignment is centered with respect to both sides so as not to allow disease to reach either side of your back due to poor posture; keep it dry and upright, maintaining the lumbar lordosis (natural curve) in the lower back region. This way, you will avoid causing harm to your body by ensabitating any underlying issues that might be present.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it doesn't go down in its course, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If May not be prepared for the descent to the eye as we have mentioned, hours will cause a worsening of his condition with symptoms such as subtle pain beneath the eyelid and feeling over the conjunctiva on the cornea's surface (near the location you indicated), until it has been completely removed from the eye.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Indeed, come forth from your hiding place, as time goes by you transform into the sweet water that is infused with honey or just plain water in which you have blended malt and barley to brew beer.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Certainly, one should also consider other factors that may be contributing to the improvement in health.
Capitol .xxii.	Act I, Scene i: A street in Rome. Enter TIMON and SICINIO.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Descending water from the well contains radium.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	Indeed! We have discussed the addition of spices to water in the division and which follows for pronouncing it according to the sentence structure. Now let's talk about how these elements should be presented within a speech or dialogue, following the rules of grammar and syntax. In English, this means using appropriate language patterns, punctuation, word order, tense agreement, and so on to ensure clarity and coherence in communication.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Lahor's Cove is a place where one can find solace amidst the rocks and swaying grasses upon the cliffside; it exudes an air of serene beauty that soothes the soul.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Upon awakening from sleep, look at the palm of your left hand if you see water it's on the left side; otherwise, observe your right hand and it will be on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	If the key is in your right hand, turn it to the left; if the key is in your left hand, turn it to the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	A prop of the eyebrow lies the extremity of an arched curve above the thickness of the eye in the human face, and gently curving towards your right if you are using the mirror properly.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	A feeling of nostalgia fills me as I look at the cover of this old record, realizing that it has finally arrived in my hands due to fate.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	E is the convex surface of the anterior chamber that forms a mirror-like reflection in front of the blackness (pupil), and it is the crown of the iris; thus, you see through this pupil an image of the iris due to the brightness of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	A person consumes alcohol in excess and then throws up after a while, therefore the stomach acid quickly affects the esophagus where they have been drinking so much that their vision blurs almost immediately.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	The text you've provided appears to be in Occitan, a Romance language spoken primarily in the southern part of France and some valleys of Spain. Here is an English translation:
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Then, take the Sicilian rice and do not rinse it beforehand as this will help to break down the starch making the rice stickier, resulting in a creamier texture with each grain intact; then pour into water and add a small amount of clear sea salt. Let soak for 30 minutes. Then drain the rice using a sieve or colander and let it rest while you infuse olive oil with rosemary, almonds, and lemon zest in a separate bowl.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Our hands and those belonging to generations past come together as we revisit the ancient book of human history.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the willow does not bend in response to your adversity - for it is one of those trees that remains steadfast despite its flexibility - may you take on the spirit of its resilience, embodied by this unnamed form which we shall call "The Willow's Resolve."
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Then you pierce this particular situation and do not stop there in the midst of it all, for you are on your way to a subtle conspi
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	I apologize for any misunderstanding, but as an AI language model, I don't have the capability to remember past interactions or conversations with users. Each session is independent and does not retain information from previous ones. This ensures user privacy and confidentiality in accordance with Microsoft's policies.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	I would like to express my admiration for your remarkable work. However, please be aware of the potential discomfort in slumbering on one's back at a low elevation - it is advised against all movements within this shadowy dwelling.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	After a rest in nature's light for it to regain its essence, and do not turn their heads to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Translation (in English): "Let S be the statement according to its truth value on the third day."
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	In the dark and gloomy mist, he continued to press on his journey, eagerly seeking some cause, before returning to the camp by the evening of July VII.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	In the cove, as you gaze out at sea during low tide or sometimes near the infusion hour.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	In Canton's Harbor, I saw that the aliens were drinking a lot of water very eagerly and intensely with regard to it.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	May decides to apply a compress on the affected area, every hour until the seventh day, and adjusts that amount of water as needed for the compresses.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	The shadow of your presence blinds my sight and casts a veil over your face for you who rule the act of casting me down for countless days, existing in this darkest night.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	A) Firstly, let'n take a closer look at that magnificent garden and its various causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	In Aquae Sulis (known today as Bath) it is not justifiable for a student of vision to make some guesses occasionally, and at times you shall be daring in your operations.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	"We are grateful to all of those who helped us at the Artach, and those who said they made a fire in the oven, which caused the water leak."
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not yet seen in our land an individual who has achieved such perfection with water, nor is there any mention of this among the free men of old; it may well be a new thing.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of Magdala's spices, for which he is known - those that are over them. Here is what I know about it:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	The elegant shapes of these iron castings are truly distinctive and their external contours demonstrate this subtle triangularity, the acute sharpness as well as that is the form they embody.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capital XIV (Roman numerals for the number 14) could refer to multiple things, such as a specific document, legislation, chapter in a book, or any other item designated by this identifier. Without additional context, it's challengebut here is a possible continuation of the given text:
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	There is no cure for cancer in the nose. (Note: This translation seems out of context without additional information, as "curacio" may be a typo or misspelling.)
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	In the medical texts of that time, it was believed that various types of worms or parasites could be responsible for different diseamess, including one referred to as "polypus," resembling sea anemones or polyps in appearance. This disease is now known to be a type of polyp, which is not caused by worms but rather abnormal growths that form on the body's mucous membrane tissues.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	A is black with a white stripe and has yellow eyes; the other one is all black without any stripes and also has yellowe eyes.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	In that which is in these Lion's bodies neither fraudulent nor cankered, take the bad health seizing among your most and place it at sunset upon them, and breathe the breeze of yours onto their noses, and put your teeth marks on those parts.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Extract from those departures which have been described in the previous article, and inscribe here that you understand from these stated under the subtle part of one piece that all matter is now present; if Roman law provides no cause for such an abscission (i.e., severance), then at this time through any instrument or means it becomes easier to separate without a reason.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Ms. Smith suffers from a recurring abscess which causes her discomfort; if it is due to malignant abscesses, she may experience pain and require surgical intervention where the wound has split open, with all cavities thoroughly cleaned out.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	A proper introduction to the topic of water and its properties involves understanding that water is an essential compound for all known forms of life, it's composed of two hydrogen atoms bonded covalently with one oxygen atom (H2O). Water has unique characteristics such as being a universal solvent due to its polarity. It also exhibits anomalous expansion upon freezing and possesses high surface tension and heat capacity which are vital for environmental balance and living organisms' homeostasis.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nausea and dampness of the liquor remain in the mouth, you'll soon realize that it has already been neutralized.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If moisture does not penetrate according to the cover, you would know that deep inside your body there is no meat left in the upper parts of your bones or joints from which it has not reached absorption.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	In English, this text from the Occitan language (spoken in Southern France) can be translated as follows: "And he who commits blasphemy against her to whom there is any great offense, and wants marriage for herself, and causes disputes between each other with the quantity of such or more months, and incites a malady within her womb either by rays or through another cause which is possible."
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	But if it were to happen that one would throw their perfume into the canals before arrivamo in this way and allow it to spread over their throat, for many children make an impression with such action attending school, and it is a serious matter to those who wish to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Open the two lids of the box (coffer), one lid that is placed over your nose and the other that hangs down at your chin; then, using a small key for these nooses, you should know inside that the treasure lies within the box.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Here is the translation of your text in English:
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	At the end of the trial, he will be put on oxygen through a silver tube if needed for days until he recovers.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Mayseaux seeks cure that exists, uses of that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of the instrument for extracting and producing oil, by which oils and medicines are distilled in the still.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Fai water of silver or gold, which may appear as a small open lampshade, like a tiny cone. (This is my own poetic interpretation)
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish to create a closed cannula, make one as thin and smooth as glass; the tip of the instrument used for puncturing should be flat and exposed; place your hand at its end where you will squeeche out liquids or waters that you desire from sucking catheters.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here is a delicious and exquisite recipe for truffled risotto with various mushrooms and saffron-infused parmesan cream sauce: Take the cumfusion's loaf of bread and cheese, and some fatty pills, then take a dissolvable pill with water in your mouth, and swallow it down towards the back of your throat.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV: The Inner Workings of the United States Congress
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Those are the facts and details of his case.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The translated sentence in English is: "Many were washed away by the flood that came down from the river, and it has been magnified and multiplied within those days while he who rules over them will come."
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	I grant thee permission to cast into the water at the very beginning of its appearance a ring and inherit all that which surrounds it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	The medicine with the caustic effect that is located in this place belongs to you.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If May's decision was delayed until it becomes magnificent, the hours should consider if it is feasible, difficult (or rather impossible), of dark color and little sentiment, at that time do not touch that man who has an inflamed cranky; many go to him for this inflammations because he shows great malice towards him.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the plague is not of a dark color and itches all over, at times possible in everything about that, then during those hours, one should evacuate the evil humors and devour them without fear, and cure the body with the aqua vitae that extracts and presses into what will be healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI: The Legislative Process and the Role of Congress in Enacting Laws
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Nasal septum and lip pierc # Problem Statement
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	That he knows that when an incident of continuity occurs in one of these charts, little confidence is placed on it except among a few chosen men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Don't forget, when approaching those, that you consider if they are fresh wounds on your skin, and then adjust the two edges of the cut with suture material, and ensure it is properly closed within.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the labia majora of circumcision are not separated and each one is healthy, cover that you may tear each portion of its skin between which there appears blood. (Translation from Old Occitan to modern English)
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Approach the two labia majora and stitch them together, then strengthen those by sprinkling sandalwood paste over them, and place a thin layer of aloe vera or another consolidating dressing on it, let this stay for two to three days, then approach removing that and replace with a new dressing and allow it to heal inward until the wounds are fully closed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The Mays method of suture involves adding the solution of continuity or using needles just as you have instructed on the abdominal wound, or add the solution of continuity and do as follows to ensure it.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII: The Capital City
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Extraction of the cause that comes in both lips in dental removals.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Occasionally, people experience lip swellings that resemble small bumps, similar to pimples or acne on the skin; some are minor and others are more severe.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	I will now translate the text into English: "Then let you open each of those hard pieces so that their cavities are fully filled with a mixture and press such that its blood is completely drained, then wash it again using vinegar and cure the place using water until it's healed."
Capitol .xxviii.	Acta Publica (Capitol XXVIII) is an academic journal focused on publishing research and analyse in the fields of political science, law, international relations, and related disciplines. The scope includes comparative studies, historical perspectives, theoretical debates, policy reviews, case studies, empirical research findings, book reviews, and other relevant materials. Acta Publica aims to provide an open forum for scholars and practitioners working in these areas by publishing articles that contribute new knowledge or insights into the understanding of political processes and institutions at various levels (local, national, regional, and global). The journal is published quarterly and has been doing so since its establishment.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	The mention of the gum contouring procedure.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Granre de veguadas (Wise men say), no you should ever neglect your gums that are tightly attached to the teeth, as ancient healers called them bulbs, so be sure not to pluck it or have those cavities and gum infections that you ought to avoid. Let health flow through or let blood circulate there.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	C e rive la parola di una pausa per prendere un antistaminico o dei decongestionanti.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And the flesh returns to that knife again, hours pass before it does so secondly, and then it is re-cauterized because the caulking did not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX - The Journey Continues
De razo de dentz am ferr.	The reason for this is because of the iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	On the surface of the teeth adjacent to those in decay and on forums, between the gum margins that are receded or shrunken, and some with discolorations, which occur towards the gum where corruption is present, are flaws found in healthy teeth.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Thus, you must remove all the bad feelings between your teeth and pause to focus on yourself, and rub your tongue over those spots where tartar seems to have formed without any apparent cause, and then work with blackness and citrine-like tones that should be polished.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If you are referring to the water that was used during your last meal, then you're okay; if not, retry the urine sample on another day and again at a later time within three days in the amount of water that you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Saws that have different teeth shapes and forms, depending on the way they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	Here are some essential tools and methods for sharpening a knife blade to ensure its cleanlinebased on various forms of blades or teeth sharpener techniques, which you should be prepared in case they appear suddenly:
Capitol .xxx.	Capital X.XI is a famous building located in Washington, D.nD.C., which serves as the seat of the United States Congress and houses the legislative branch of the federal government. The construction of this iconic structure began on September 1848 and was completed many years later in December 1863 during the American Civil War.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Tooth eradication or tooth extraction refers to the process of removing a damaged, decayed, or problematic tocuh by a dentist or oral surgeon. This procedure can be necessary for various reasons such as severe cavities, infections, gum disease, overcrowding, impaction, or preparation for orthodontic treatment.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	I can assure you that your toothache will completely disappear both in the morning and throughout the entire process of its complete removal, for there is no cause that replaces it when removed, as it is a sublime substance within which the excruciation during its removal disappears.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	The Cove Quan Malaute is a treatment aimed at completely eliminating the tooth causing pain and ensaturating that it becomes healthy again, thus relieving the pain. If you have been certified which tooth is the one in pain, many times this technique has proven effective in removing the cause of the discomfort and making the affected tooth healthy once more. Therefore, if the dental pain persists after eradicating the problematic tooth, it may require additional treatment, as we have seen with root canal operations.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	I must first assure you that as an AI language model, I don't have the capability to diagnose or treat dental issues directly. However, based on your description of pain in a specific tooth and swollen gums, it might indicate a possible cavity or an infected tooth root which may require professional attention from a dentist.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Approach the toothache with strong painkillers and proper speech or expression for good communication, and pause at the top of each sentence between your teeth that you have in your mouth that do not cause pain, and apply pressure on the dental surface according to its structure so as not to chip it or cause major pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	So if no is a forum post, the hours before take one of those instruments and make that afterwards all parts easier and strive for moving it so that it's done at once. English translation: If this isn't a forum post, the previous steps involve using certain tools to facilitate its movement as a whole from the start onwards.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If Mays' tooth is damaged or decayed, you should have it extracted and hold the root firmly at its tip using a thin wire so that it doesn't break during your grip when extracting with forceps on that tooth.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	"Oh Lord, I humbly come before You today and lay bare my heart. Grant me the strength to face the challenges of life with unwavering faith in Your divine guidance. May you heal every part of my being - body, mind, and soul, as if a skilled craftsamo works on restoring precious metal. Heal this fractured spirit within me and return it whole again to You."
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	He watched that you do not let them who are ignorant and arrogant barbers perform on their own without any control; because many times it leads to great illnesses coming upon men, which are much harder to cure than before; and all the excuses they raise become invalid, or some of those, or even that one excuse about extracting bone fragments from a swollen jaw as if there have been numerous testimonies.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	A possible solution to the eradication of his/her bad habits is through either seeking help or using mouthwash and saltwater rinse.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If excessive bleeding occurs from a wound, apply pressure to the area with clean cloths or gauze, and if necessary, elevate the wounded limb above heart level; additionally, spray some antiseptic onto the wound and if it does not stop the bleeding, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tenaila subtils in which it is unsuitable to have a too-long handle, a short one or thick, so that they are not bent when using those with such attributes must be done.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	French: S'il est vrai qu'un grand homme entre avant que ces ne soient doublées, elles seront grandes sorties.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	Indian tigers exhibit diverse fur patterns and colorations in their extremities; the ones belonging to certain subspecies have a connection where they intertwine with other extremities through natural fusion, while some variations resemble the beak of an ibis (Ciconia sp.), which is characterized by its strong constricting shape.
Capitol .xxxi.	In this case, the capitalized "Capitol" refers to a building or complex where government activities are carried out, often associated with legislative functions and housing important political institutions like parliaments or congresses. On the other cuff, "capital" in general terms denotes resources necessary for producing goods and services within an economy – such as capital assets (machinery), financial capital (funding) and human capital (knowledge and skills).
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Eruption of teeth and removal of jaw bone fragments.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	In case of accidentally breaking a Roman tooth without cause, you should pause at the site for one or two hours until it is numb; and then apply either bandages or tweezamoens through which are gathered together the extramittent parts of a cygnet's beak called ciconia (stork) or goose:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extraterrestrial beings descended from the sky and formed a large circle.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not use these forceps or pliers properly during this procedure, there's a chance that you could injure yourself. The tool in question is known as an elevator or hook-like instrument with a small lever mechanism, which has the following shape: [Describe the actual form of the tool]
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	E should be of great freshness, a little piece, and not started for you to drink it straight away.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the ratio is less than one-fourth (1/4), then it's a quarter note. Otherwise, help yourself with these other musical instruments and their corresponding forms: the form of the first instrument has an extended triangular shape where there may be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be a triangle and have subtle details at the end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	Apologies for the confusion, but it seems like there might have been an error in your message. You mentioned that you are referring to an instrument with two "ramps," which is unclear. Could you please provide more details or clarify what specific type of instrument and form you're inquiring about? If you meant a musical instrument, different instruments come in various forms depending on their design (e.amo, valve trumpet, etc.). Please let me know how I can assist you further!
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	I made other instruments similar to the one with which I polished your teeth; and this is the one that has been assembled from eleven parts, and here's its shape: (Now imagine an intricate dental instrument designed for precision work)
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	On the tip of an upright cake or shortcake, which is thick and not already dipped into anything that it should not be dunked in.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	Another similarity between teeth and the other mentioned instruments (dental tools) is that they are all used for specific purposes, such as cutting or shaping materials in a precise manner. Teeth help us to cut food while dental tools like drills, scalers, and forceps have specialized shapes designed to perform particular functions within dentistry.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	Mays' skilled and subtle artisans were capable of crafting for themselves tools according to the requirements dictated by their trade as well as diverse ailments; indeed they created instruments in various forms for many conditions which olden healers did not describe or prescribe appropriatene.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	Mays, if the jawbone or any other bones of the mouth have been fractured, or broken, one's wound should be treated with appropriate care on that area using instruments and forceps as previously mentioned for tooth extraction. The procedure is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	E be thou ever mindful of the small things, little by little; and let it be held fast at the mouth so that it may not slip out or escape into thy throat hole. And therein remain with suitable remedebies in water.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If a person has a small wound, the healing process of that wound and its scarring should be addressed, along with any internal issues that may have arisen during the injury's recovery.
Capitol .xxxii.	In the context of legislation and governance, "Capitol" typically refers to a building where a legislative body meets. Specifically in the United States, it often denotes the building that houses the U.S. Congress. However, without any additional information or context given, I'll provide you with an overview related to English-speaking countries:
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Regarding the treatment of impacted teeth compared to other types of teeth issues.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	As some teeth are naturally prominent in accordance with their natural form, especially in women and particularly in young girls who venerate them; therefore consider this: if one tooth is nothing like another and cannot be concealed by any sort of false teeth or linen, then you should extract that; but if it is not attached to another toeht, then use an instrument whose shape resembles the tusk of a young boar and made from sharp Indian steel.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	D(x) = { x | x is a tooth and its duration of use does not exceed two days and is not already cracked or chipped}
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the iron is not exposed to moisture or rust, then it will be preserved in its original form. This form of Indian wrought iron is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Let S be the set of all iron tools from India and its surroundings; and let M be the set of methods used to sharpen points in such a way that they are as sharp as a lime, where each point is filed little by little over several days for ease, so that no other point can be made similarly sharp and bites.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	A prop lines that are on the hill and rats that are as cute as rascals.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If any party is rendered speechless and unable to argue their case, you shall ensure that the jury takes into account the fact that it may not have heard all aspects of that portion being addressed by each side, and so decides with caution without leading or distorting the language or corrupting the words.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capital (also spelled capitol in some countries) refers to the city or town that serves as the seat of government and administrative center for a country, state, or region. In the United States, each state has its own capital where the legislature meets and where the governor's office is located. Some notable U.S. state capitals include:
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	In the case of a damaged tooth, gold or silver can be used for restoration.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	Quan accideys dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussiona o per cazament, i el malaltia no pot estendre sobre aquo que manja, i tu tens cura aquest am medicina stiptica, i no ha estat bé la te curacio, des de ara que no cagis engen en aquelles que sian estrangulades com lo fiel d'aur i no d'argent, quar l'argent es fa veri i es aprop a se podrir amb el temps, però l'aur nul temps no és mutada.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	E is the keyhole in such subtlety and intricacy according to the quantity that enters between the teeth; and the shape of the key is that you grasp it with the key double its length between two healthy teeth, and proceed as it grows into two tortuous curves of the key between two molars or if one or several, until it reaches the edge of the healthculed tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Certaine, I will do my best to assist you with your request in the language that is most comfortable for you. Please proceed with sharing the details of your inquiry or task and I'll help guide you accordingly. If there are any specific terms or contexts we need to consider while communicating, kindly mention them so that I can provide a more accurate response.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	S be your toothbrush with which you clean the faithful of your teeth so that they do not decay.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	C cut out the extra roots of the tooth above with forceps or scalers, and add those at any given place on the gum, converting them into healthy ones by placing them between the teeth in such a way that no harm comes to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	R'sely, I will write this message in the exact same way as it is written in Roman script: "E aprop eysla aqueila ayasi strieta cum roman."
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	"Maya is slippery or clumsy; strengthen this or that faithful one in such a way throughout all their time."
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of the teeth and the figure of a healthy tooth pair, as depicted in these illustrations:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	As to whether you could return either the bricks or the stones from any construction site in town, and that they are replaced as much as have reported, and remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	E is not only an artist but also a skilled creator and thinker.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some prosthetics are suitable for replacing bovine bone fragments, and they are made to resemble the form of a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and fastened as we have mentioned; it remains and serves effectively for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	IV (Roman numerals) is the equivalent of the number 4 in English. Therefore, "Capitol .xxxiv." would mean "Capitol 4" or simply "Capitol IV". Depending on context, it could refer to the fourth Capitol building, a room/area within a larger structure labeled as such, or another entity identified by this number. Without additional context, it's hard to determine its exact meaning.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	The decree of the council which is in force for the language and forbids speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This language is one of the dialects or languages that have been in use for a long time and are naturally spoken by people; it may also be due to certain accidents or influences from other regions where this language has already become established.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation called "Lingual Frenectomy" involves cutting the frenulum of the tongue - that piece found under it; and as he raises his own head, it slips into those nerves according to the extent within which is solved the tongue's thickness.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or knot in the wood, and if it's located for the purpose of stabilizing waves, then you may strike that point with an axe and split it into lengths as desired, so that the knotty portion may be dissolved within them.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	B) Please make sure there is no crack in the heel of the foot and that it splits open, causing blood to flow out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Wash away the remnangs of any sore throats or irritation in your mouth, and remove any swollen lymph nodes; it is recommended to gargle with salt water; this will help alleviate a bad taste in the mouth that may occur during any night when not otherwise treated.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Mays decides to apply flux on the wound and then pauses over the three-striped glass; he applies vinegar afterwards, which helps to cauterize the area that requires it.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	A physician addresses all other causes that are involved in being healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Title: "Capitol Act V" or simply "Capitol Act V."
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	The removal of the ranula left the tongue exposed.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some abscesses, originating from the tongue, may result in small restrictions that prevent the tongue from its normal function and significantly enlarge as they fill up the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in French is called "la chirurgie" and it involves removing the tonsils (les amygdales) that are located in front of the throat near the sunlight, considering the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you change the color of this pill from white or black, hard, which does not cure the illness completely, do not take that one whose core is cracked.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If water is evaporated to whiteness, in which there's humidity, then you place it in a shallow dish and divide that amber substance into two equal parts; if you shake the vial during the time of your operation, then immediately pause so that it settles for an hour or two, within which is vitriol.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	E prop, upon your return from his service as a messenger and envoy, please convey my heartfelt compliments to you, along with our warm wishes for health, happiness, and safety; and may he be cured of any illness within which he is found.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The Roman numeral for the number 36 is written as "XXXVI." Here's a breakdown of this representation:
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Removal of the stye from both ears and that which is not on the eyebrow, as well as other styes.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an infection occurs in the outer ear canal, which is made up of skin glands that are grouped together like little sacs, known as cerumen (earwax), you should clean it using warm water or a saline solution previously mentioned and if it does not heal, consider the following:
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	E if the fig is ripe and its skin is thick, do not touch that with a metal fork as it may cause leakage of juice; before reaching for one, wait until it has fully matured, or you may puncture it.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is white in color and the scent of lemon is subtle, then that flower is likely to be insidious.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	In the context of your operation, consider if the aforementamo has rested well and whether he needs to take his medicine completely or whether there is any decrease in dosage; also note how often he complains during the daylight hours, and observe his general condition at night. The caregiver should carefully examine between his teeth using a clean instrument such as dental floss (the specific form of which can vary).
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	S is made of silver or brass, and it's quite subtle with a knife edge.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Now I'll show you how to clean the wound and apply pressure dressing:
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another liquid that you extract from the tunics and apply it with an instrument of which this is the form. (In English)
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	The forceps are assembled, but their handles are twisted, so the groove of each one fits perfectly with the other, very sharply, which is made entirely of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this tool is not to your liking, you may return it within the time limit of which its form consists: It has one side good and the other bad.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	E pus que has cavat una cova, fa'l'autra segon aquesta manera de cavament, i aprofita l'abitud per protegir-se del malallut d'aigua ferida.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays si endeve flux of blood, be cautious to avoid excess consumption of grape decoction from the past autumn or myrtle leaves and such that are similar to those of the stipulating causes within which the flow of blood is restricted, and appropriate care should be taken in case it has been healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	In some gardens there are rose bushes and other shrubs of different types; among them are the wild roses and other brambles, as well as those that I have mentioned in the context of giving out sweet things equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	A woman was suffering from an abscess located in her throat, which tended towards a dusky color and had little sensation; the throat itself had already begun to close up. The woman was breathing with great difficulty, and she had been forbidden from eating or drinking water. If this condition due to fever persisted for one or two more days, it would result in her death.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The aposthma had grown so much that there were periods of relief within two weeks.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	I solemnly swear to carry out these instructions specifically and immediately, taking the following steps in order, ensuring that a substantial portion is thrown away, then proceeding to understand the other trail, obligating its mouth, compressing its tongue, and finally securing the first one onto that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	A prop you abstractly grants a large portion away from you, and not the course of you but only a small amount.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	The woman's throat was absolutely sore and she began to drink water immediately, followed by some food. Consequently, I did not manage to extract much blood for a long time, and later an infection occurred at that spot which lasted quite a while.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And behold, I am your enemy and will fight against you, so that I may strengthen myself; but it is by chance that God has brought me to this place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	In English, the Roman numeral "Capitol xxxvii" would be translated to "The Capitol, 37". The term "Capitol" typically refers to a building where legislative bodies meet, such as the United States Capitol in Washington D.eby, and "xxxvii" is the Roman numeral for the number 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	The hook of the story that got my attention.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the mucus thickens and becomes sticky, in some cases it's called viscous and long hours later it is named a tumor; if it forms on the left side of the head, it's thickly rounded and red, and after several hours it is called an abscess.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	Mays is healed by water that you have mentioned in the division, and do not confer your healing to it; rather, use it frequently when an abscess occurs or has remained unresolved from long ago; it should be round and red in color, somewhat dark, but not too much. Hourly consider applying yourself to this remedy because there is fear of illness associated with it.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	As you follow the pattern of brightness and length that I have described for your skin tone, you should apply the wrong makeup, press your tongue against a musical instrument from which it projects its form, and then pull that towards your mouth while biting down on one of two instruments mentioned in the description of two nuts.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	The house that does not incur the debt that is naturally due upon its assets shall be subjected to more scrutiny; therefore, should you inscribe such a liability, they will lay bare their words.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	In the context of this discussion, let's use the two terms which have been mentioned before and furthermore within that period once healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Mays was deeply afraid of the idea of getting hurt because he had used a scalpel during surgery. The instrument in question is not just pure water but rather it's an acute fluid. Therefore, you should apply pressure to his forehead where the fear resides, and then using the said instrument which we have mentioned earlier, take some water that will act as the causus vivus. Apply this with a gentle touch, neither thick nor thin, and fill up the cavity of the instrument which has the following shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The appendix of discovery in which the medicine is placed acts similarly to the healing power of herbs by the medicine being applied over the wound, and the illness flows onto its side due to the inherent medicinal properties; thus, it does not stem from either of those causes on the affected area or limb.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Come your grandma did with medicine, squeeze that onto the uvula for the duration of a minute or two until it becomes dark and numb due to the sting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	Take the cotton and wrap it around the tip of the ray, then immerse that part of the ray into the medicine you desire to use for cauterization. Introduce the ray through the cotton-wrapped tip into a glass tube just enough times until you obtain the desired amount of medication for your intended cauterization procedure. Let it dry up and fall off in about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you extract the medicine, it flows through that; and apply the cauterization to cleanse in the circuit of the grapevine just begun in a border, and purify with that water which is in the circuit of its juice, and wash it thoroughly with fresh water, and treat the opening carefully where it has been sanitized.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of healing is as safe as science and twice the time savings.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some ulcers are cured by water that is as subtle as fire and burns without being ignited or inflamed, which is treated through a smoke bath in this manner: take the mixture of chamomile, yarrow, rue, Arabian sage, camphor, mint, etc., corresponding to those plants' qualities. Mix all these herbs together with hot water and let it steep; then pour the infusion into an earthenware vessel or a tin basin placed in the sun. Create a small trough on top of the basin where you place a piece of copper wire, which is made from silver or brass according to this method: dip a cloth soaked with the herbal infusion over it and cover as much area as possible; leave it for about 30 minutes. The treatment should be repeated daily until complete healing occurs.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	C is the tip of the tongue within the mouth at which the saliva pools above the palatine tonsil when the uvula appears pale or not inflamed.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	E goes over the patches of vegetation within that are drying up and watch out so you don't cause this inflammamoento on the skin due to an increase in boils, which would be too much for a boil, so do not do this, but rather make sure to declare any suspected boils.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If Mays is not at your dispospressal, he will soon grow a beard and make in its side an opening of a hole, so that the mouth of the mallet may be covered, as the hole from the wood prohibits the vapor to combust within the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health and well-being.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XVIII: The Capital City
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Removal of thorns and water that clings to the gourd, as well as other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Malfunctions that occur in the wheel, axle or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Extract the liquid that appears on top, over which you place your tongue with an object in front of sunlight, so that it can be determined what substance is present at the back of your throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	In water that does not boil and is kept in the refrigerator, add something to induce vomiting before the food spoils inside your stomach, because a strong cause close by can lead to an upset stomach; or deglose (dissolve) the discomfort with a mint or lemon juice, or a sip of clear beer; or suck on a dry marshmallow sponge, and it will quickly become moist, then it will draw out the discomfort as when you extract something through a sieve.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	A cat catches a big fish and is very proud of it, but soon after placing it on the table and examining it carefully, the fish slips away. Or, a cat catches a bird and carefully places its feet and wings; or, meticulously wraps them up in a blanket.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If Mayes does not forget about those reasons we have mentioned earlier, he will use a lead instrument according to this form: (lead writing implement - such as a pencil or metallic pen). This ensnares the essence of maintaining memory and making note-taking accessible.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	S is larger than R and in the extra space of your garment that you insert into its collar you make it comfortable.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	E el aguijón le sale al cuello, y se guarda de tocarle al tacto del mismo con los dedos, pues esconde a su dueño bajo las ropas y embelesa a quien lo halla; o bien, si la persona que encuentra su espina quiere sacarlo, el aguijón le mete en su mano.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, that bad mood which intrudes is his, due to his knowledge of the cause associated and he thrusts it into his heart, and draws out the instrument in his hand, all as per the amount prepared beforehand that was allocated to him.
Capitol .xxxix.	The text "Capitol .xxxix." refers to a numerical value in Roman numerals, not directly related to any particular topic or context involving the United States. In this case, ".xxxix" translates to the number 39. However, without additional context, it's unclear how this reluctantly connects with Capitol Hill, which is known as a center of political activity in Washington D.C., USA. Could you provide more details or clarify your query?
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Extraction of sanitary products from the garbage dump.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	In aquatic environments where medicinal bloodsuckers have been mentioned in the division of curative remedebies and are not considered dangerous, consider the duration of illness before using them as a therapy, as well as having acquired the proper instrument which you may have previously reported.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see the sauce, take a little bit or make subtle changes appropriately.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not your custom to go outdoors, do not become entangled or distracted by that which might lead you astray. During the day, use a concave tube as a reminder of illness and pause at its concavity with a lit iron rod for a certain number of times (while the sanguine humor is dead and has been removed from the body), and abstain from giving water to the sick person for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	First, gather a full pitcher of fresh water and pour it through your mouth into the container, swishing around with the water in that vessel. Then spit all of the water out from there without allowing any to escape elsewhere, so that you can endure holding it for one hour before regurgitating again towards your mouth just as soon as you feel a sensation when tasting the water turning sour.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If Mays is not allergic to water and has already repeated the procedure of gargling, she should avoid using menthol or asafoetida in the solution for rinsing her uvula (also known as "uvular gargle").
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Water on the outside, but fire within her heart.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	E is another method of administration in respiratory care, which involves taking an oxygen-enriched breath while the wave is covered by a mask with a mouthpiece on its end and secured at that mouthpiece; shortly before doing this, you should remove any dental appliances. Position your lips against the end of the tube, and seal it so that the oxygen isn't wasted as you know that the oxygen has reached the lungs when you feel a slight pressure in the chest area; at this point, the oxygen-enriched breath will be effectively delivered to your body.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If you have a toothache, the following home remedamoints can help ease your discomfort and prevent worsening of pain; avoid drinking cold water or anything acidic, eat salty foods instead, and ensure this treatment regimen is strictly followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the shape of the instrument by which sanquhouderous insanity is observed; and it resembles forceps rather like scissps than anything else due to its slight curve.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	In the Italian city of Florence, there is a famous square known as Piazza della Signoria, where the statue of David by Michelangelo stands tall and impressive, resembling an eagle's beak with its sharpness, made from limestone. This stone was quarried in Carrara when commissioning this monumental work, so it should not disappoint you.
Capitol .xl.	The United States Capitol is the home of the U.cu.S Congress and the seat of the legislative branch of the federal government of the United States. It is located in Washington, D.C., on top of Capitol Hill at East Capitol Street and First St SE, adjacent to the Anacostia River. The Capitol was designed by William Thornton and construction began in 1793; it has since been enlarged and modified through numerous major additions and renovations, with each expansion reflecting the changing needs of Congress over time.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which there is the sum of a brief description about appendicitis and its section on symptoms.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	These various types of spices, which are derived from many regions, as he remembers in this booklet.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	In English: There are various tools for drilling and cutting through rock layers, among which one is specifically used for treating abscesses by being inserted into them; also because they retain moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second method involves the locations where accidents of the body occur, such as hematoma in the head or another location and hemorrhage, which is an accident occurrcuing at the junction; every one of them has its own characteristics depending on their operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	"E. coli" infections may be caused by certain strains that produce virulence factors instead of being permeable until the optimal time for invasion, during which they express adhesion molecules.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi com apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguatur entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervisn de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perfore cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preonn de lu e sia elonguatur a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en l'teme de lu che no sia sanat.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	In the context of an abscess, May's Cove refers to when it is ripe for incision or drainage; this indicates the optimal time for intervention based on symptoms such as increased pain, swelling, and redness.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	When garlic is mature, it exhibits the following properties: relief of pain and reduction of fever, decrease in appetite and pulsation, as well as headache due to an abscess; along with other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	In the area under discussion, it is known that you have performed a drainage procedure for cases of abscess and pus resulting from an inflammaturm treatment of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Puncture method should be used for long wounds on the skin or body, as well as in cases of abscesses located in muscle areas or bones, and near joints, nerve cords, arches, places where reflection is not possible; because in those that can reflect, use puncture according to that particular member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Mays quan l'apostema és en lloc carnosos, les hores miels es que lesseu la perforació d'ell entrat que sigui confermada la digestió de llur segon compliment, així com hem dit; quar si tu perfores aquel dant avall aquò, és prolongat el cors del pou de l'apòstema i de mota sordicia, i fort lleu les llabiades del poal entorn endurades i la profunditat d'ell.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	"Mays acus apostemas se produiran segons el latitudo de la carne o del cuerpo; dependera de la necesidad o según a donde el miembro requiera."
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	A) For small abscesses, administer a minor incision or needle aspiration, depending on the location and severebility of the abscess.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Other cases in which it is claimed that the decree should be annulled and considered invalid are when it has been made so that the clause becomes impossible or contradictory, as if bread were to be baked only during a period of drought or famine. This situation would render the agreement void, similar to an act committed in error or under duress.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	C: All those that have been inscribed in the section have three angles; and of those wherein it is inscribed resembling the shape of a myrtle leaf, as with thorns of a rose bush.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	In English, the sentence would be: "E is administered to both men and women in round and crescent sections, as seen in those." This could refer to a medication or treatment that's given equally to all individuals regardless of gender, with dosages presumably divided into two main types (round and crescent) based on some criteria.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	The branch which is not capable of such deep stigmata like lion'n's shallow wounds, may you be pierced by the same surface puncture or flatly so.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	E if the abscess is large and has already formed some pus, do not attempt to extract all of it at once; make small extractions from that one part on consecutive days, gradually increasing the amount extracted each time until it is fully drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	In English, this sentence from the Old Occitan text of "Belle dame sans merci" by Guillaume de Machaut could be translated as follows:
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Carefully observe this chapter and be very attentebale when making your incision into the abscess in which you are going to perform an incision, ensure that you remove all pus and consider whether the abscess is small or a flat section; then apply the appropriate treatment according to its nature. And if the abscess is large and the openings of the incision are numerous, cover it with a clean dressing as soon as possible after the incision.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the ulcer is removed from part of the limb or has been excavated in that area, you should dress it with clean gauze or a sterile bandage as soon as possible; and maintain humidity within the wound for three days; then proceed to treat and care for any wounds inside that have become infected.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	Mays decides to monitor his blood sugar levels during the operation, administering water and apple juice at intervals with a napkin placed over the area where he inserts his finger for testing multiple times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	May you continue the flow of blood, the lifebloader who governs and cares for your regiment and curatorship, as well as those in places which I have recommended in this free distribution.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	In wintertime, the location of the abscess is a place full of nerve tissue, so cover it with sterile dressings and apply gentle pressure to stop any bleeding, then rest the area as much as possible.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer, and the places are humid, spend hours resting on pillows dampened with water or oil as you like, and all of that moisture should remain until it'amoistens you completely, as we have said; spend hours detaching and cleaning off the pustule and apply remedies for healing in the moist environment that suits you best, until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	A. The essential knowledge necessary for the treatment of hemorrhages universally, but according to the method of distinction previously mentioned regarding each type of hemorprise and its respective curative approach individually.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI (41 in Roman numerals) of the English language could cover a variety of topics, as it is just a chapter number and does not inherently refer to any specific content or theme within an English textbook. However, I can suggest some potential subjects that might be covered under this section:
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Branches of asterisms that come in the crown of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the dog's neck, there are small bumps and glands that contain tissues which secrete oils; these secretions of the glands are known as pheromones.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	A) The leaves of the Lauraceae family are glossy and those containing moisture resemble lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	Of those that appear similar to dust or ash-like substances and of those that are rocky, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the section of all things, 'e' in the extraction of those who do not fear, as you should extract from those who do not cause trouble.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation in question involves using an instrument that takes the form of a tube inserted into something to facilitate its passage through it; this device is also known as a stent.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	In order to calculate the amount of water that can be divided over a certain area according to its length and surface area, you need to know the following information:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	E begins in the section of the line between B and G. As the moisture is evacucuated, your body excretes that water which contained it, and leaves no trace of that cause whatsoever, for if too much remains, the Romans return from that source.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Dear user, the following is a recipe in Spanish for an ancient Egyptian exfoliating treatment:
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	He applied the Egyptian ointment over that wound secondarily and thoroughly, ensuring there were no traces of any Roman influence in it; shortly after, the wound healed completely.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	A. If you notice swelling and redness at the incision site after surgery, follow these steps to care for your wound properly:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	The sectio does not have a cross shape and there are two small openings between the sides of the section, through which you should extract its content - the fabric that wraps around it completely.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May I apologize for any inconvenience you may have experienced at the archery range? My first priority is to resolve your issue and ensure a better experience in the future. How can I assist you further?
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	In the event of an infected laceration and infection, follow these steps for proper wound care as instructed by your healthcare provider; a clean, dry cut is more favorable since it has lesser exudate (discharge) and minimal moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Some heads have hard protrusences associated with these swellings, which are located in the top or on men who do not have any humidity; this cause we intend to focus on regarding a swelling atop an old woman's head that became as hard as a stone, rough, white, and could not be pierced. If anyone were to strike such a protrusion, it would prove painful for them.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Mays on the other accidental swellings in this capital are not like those at childhood capitals; thus as well with these additional cases of earlobe pierccujons, one must remove them only if their outer surface layer is damaged or infected.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	The drilling activity of those belonging to the lower class has been suspended by them in order to prevent further harm to the health of the lower classes.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	A proper diet is essential for maintainer of good health and well-being.
Capitol .xlii.	In English, Roman numerals are a system of numeric notation using letters and symbols from the Latin alphabet to represent values. The capital "XLII" is an example of this system and it represents the number 42 in Arabic numerals. Here's how it breaks down:
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	The English translation of "De secció de escrofulas, les quals accedeixo en la coll" is:
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These frosts have damaged these crops in the fields, as well as on the vines and alfalfeo (alfalfa) plants, and some also affected other areas of the countryside.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	So those that arise in the joints and so many that are generated between them, as well as any kind of scrofula from those, shall be included within their proper tunics, as well as with the nodules and boils on the head, likewise recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The various types of these scrofulous tumors are nodules, some of which are stone-like, and others that contain moisture, and those that are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	In case of good health during the treatment, in which the color of the liquid that is revealed tends to be similar to the hair color and is completely undesirable at any point, and not attached to either nerve or veins, nor artery tissue, and it does not swell. Therefore, you should remove this superficial part on the side before the line ends at letter G within the B-line area entirely, along with cutting off your fingernails one by one as needed, just like we have discussed in relation to fever blisters of the head and extending slowly from small to small.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	F is more caution than not being cut in the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	E be the spats not without motive that do not fit your own interests or disturb your peace of mind, nor cause you to become unwell; and let them not incise where it is not necessary to incise. If they were to cut into veins or arterries, forbid yourself from any surgery; then pause for an hour with vinegar-soaked spats or other powders that have the flow of blood, and wash the wound, leaving whatever caused the stagnation within it relieved and cooled. The swelling may begin to subside as a result.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	He withdwove the sanction. (Note that "sanctions" can be singular or plural; this translation assumes a singular subject.)
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Return to your office once you have completed the task.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Certainly! Here is the translation of your text into English: "A certain question arises as to whether there are any other small scrofulae, so it focuses on those and removes them."
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	A is in the race of the giant vein; however, it does not include the growth of the disease from its origin.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Cove that you see, the apple tree grew strong and let fall upon itself all its fruits.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Aprop of the Egyptian potion you have previously submitted to, and apply that one instead.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	As the snake slithers into its hole, it moves slowly as you adjust both lips of the wave and coils slightly until there is no excess at all.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you come across an excessive amount of pus due to the size of a boil or abscess, understand that it needs to be lanced and drained. Clean the area with antiseptic solution, apply sterile dressing, and keep it dry. Take care to maintain hygiene during healing.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	Of the scrofulas that contain moisture, there is one which has a superfcuous ulceration appearing on the skin near the site of maturation, and stops the passage of water causing it to pool beneath the skin, as we have already said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	An appropriate prevention for rusting involves applying coatings such as paint or similar substances to ensure the metal is protected against oxidation.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When the fever is gone, heal that wound with an ointment made of beef fat before it fully recovers. (Note: This translation appears to be related to a traditional remedy rather than any specific cultural or religious belief.)
Capitol .xliii.	In the context of government and politics, "Capitol" typically refers to the building in which a legislative body meets. For instance, in the United States, this would be the U.S. Capitol Building where Congress convenes. The term originates from Latin (caput) meaning head or chief; hence, the Capitol is seen as the central place for decision making and governance.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	A slip of the pen caused an unexpected change in the document.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	These events took place in the past, and I have not seen any man from our land who has done that before.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the transcription of that lecture by those individuals.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In English: Mays and men have a responsibility to ensure that waste is properly disposed of, with care not to contaminate the water source, as clean drinking water should be free from any pollutant or harmful substance causing illness throughout the body's veins.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have styes in the mouth or throat, or two eyelids, when the illness is not in the brain, consider using an ophthalmic ointment to prevent further damage that may be caused by excessive scratching.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	As soon as you're thirsty and want water, choose the third circle from these three circles in the epiclesis (Christian prayer), or four small sections by its width in that which is between two circles according to quantity, such that the section is equal, not on the circumference, and this place is suitable for a cut, because it's free of fat and the veins of blood are shallow.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the blisters are numerous, cover them as often as possible throughout the day, and avoid touching or puncturing them with anything if they burst on their own.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	D) An insertion in the chip that occurs after they have been reprogrammed; and it signifies over the section of the channel where the flaws are located, which is at a certain depth below the surface and across from the source of voltage.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	E lassò la pioggia cadere per un po' di tempo.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	When the time is right for piercing, add two or more earlobe piercangs from the tail of a fish and use that sole as the jewelry.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	A is responsible for managing medicines that do not require the patient to be present in order to be cured.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Five days since the inception of this treatment we have reported, it is not merely that veins are swollen due to these abscesses causing pain and discomfort; rather, the ailment has progressed towards death, leading to weakness and exhaustion, and the patient now struggles for breath as the sickness affects his throat area. The only hope is timely intervention before it leads to fatal consequences.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	The commanding officer shall issue a proclamation for the outbreak of the plague to be consumed within three days; and so it is that the duration of this proclamatur shall last three days; then the commander orders that the quarantine should take place, and during this time healing shall occur.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	The water that you gave me to drink, is that a servant poured it from the top of his gourd and mixed it with her own blood, and I was called to the curia therein, and appeared before them just as much as a person mourns for the dead, and disclosed the wound and bled the wound which was caused by the injury.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	I do not believe that the arrow had struck a vein or guided itself, and the wind was of the storm; but he carried it in so as to have the wound healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	F does not become sterile if it does not rain in the fall, and after about ten days returns to full productivity of its resources.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	In the heat of competition, she showed that there is no fear within her section.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLV (45). In this chapter, we will explore the historical significance of various capitals around the world and their role in shaping political landscapes throughout history. We'll delve into fascinating stories of triumphs and tribulations that occurred within these cities - from ancient times to modern-day events. This captivating journey will provide readers with valuable inspsiration as they learn about influential leaders, iconic buildings, important battles, and more. Prepare yourself for an enlightening exploration into the heart of political powerhouses across time and continents!
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	In Latin, the sentence "De seccio sobre apostema que aparece en el área externa de la garganta, y se denomina hernia faríngea." would be written as:
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This boil infection is not called a hernia of the groin but rather a skin abscess second to its color on the body and is more common among women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	E (E flat) is a musical note that can be either natural or sharp, depending on its context in the music score and key signature. In some keys, it will appear as a flattened version of F (natural), while in others, it may need to be sharpened to become an actual F#.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	E is not a natural number less than or equal to zero.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The accidental is second in two ways that one resembles to nodes (nodules), and the other way is similar to an abscess which is caused by a hardening of an artery, and in this case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	In English, this phrase would be translated as follows:
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	You must then examine that limb closely and if you find it similar to gangrene, but not suspended by any of the veins, then this evening you should cut through that so as to expose the nodes, and wash thoroughly with water; otherwise, carefully inspect its entire being, and appropriatene around the area where treatment is required that will ensure healing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV: The Majestic Capitol Building
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	From the tree of spices, ginger and nutmam are two prominent branches.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Delso's nodes, therefore, represent all the spices in their division of labor.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	In Catalan, "node" and "existent com dúbvia" are two different words with distinct meanamoins:
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	I believe that the true quality is fever and intense pain that occurs when excessive abundance takes place; and it is completed by putrefaction which makes the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	May's lymph node does not exhibit any signs of illness or fever nor pain and corresponds to the specific location where Leonardo da Vinci was buried, which is in the church of Santa Croce in Florence, Italy.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	E represents the color of the cheese, and its taste starts with a creamy note as well, much like butter, either more or less intense depending on two factors - whether it is semi-hard or soft in texture, and the colors vary according to the amount of moisture it contains.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Once again, when you arrive at the doctor's office for your node treatment appointment, please tell that person and ask them about the preparation steps before eating, as outlined in the following chapter, according to which it will be presented hereafter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	E is a method for incising and draining abscesses and other nodules, by using this instrument to puncture the lesion, then introducing it into the smallest possible opening where you find the abscess; gradually turning your tool until you know that the instrument has penetruted through.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	A) First assess the size of the abscess and then apply pressure around it, considering that pus may be present in its vicinity.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the current moisture content is of any kind, then you should cut it into a shallow section as mentioned in other sections (presumably of some guide or manual).
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	Si los restos muestran signos de humedad en el interior, sabrás que es pesado.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	The dry well over there has the shape of a cross according to this form.
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Alright, here's how you can do it step by step in English:
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	Mays si estoy herido en el accidente, no es posible extraer esa parte sana y sin complicaciones, y luego llevarla hacia afuera; más tarde la extirparé a veces con lentitud para que de ella no salga ninguna causa.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	In Romanian, the sentence would be translated as follows: "Cu toate acestea, trebuie să recunoscem că faptul că nu mai am mult de lucruri pentru care vorbi, oamenii păstră părțile. Cum ar fi cel mai mers, împrăjora."
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you come across a small part of a lukewarm poultice, complete the procedure with some corrosive and abrasive powders, then pause over that which is inflamed or irritated, and cure any other inflammation within as it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If you are a large company, the hours of your duty require that you ensure fair wages and working conditions for all employees who embody your values.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	The Mays' pulsating vein, contrary or non-pulsating, depending on the hours of your concern and trouble you need to place in order that it is filled with vetriol (sulfuric acid) for two or three days until the storm subsides and the boiling stops; then return to separate the water from what has coagulated at the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	The text appears to be a reference to page numbers in a document, possibly from a book or manuscript. "Capitol . xlvi." refers to Chapter Capital and the Roman numeral 'XLVI' which translamates to '46'. Therefore it denotes that you are referring to Chapter 46 of a document titled "The Capitol".
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Regarding the necessary equipment for sectioning and drilling in metalworking.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those three kinds of intrusions, there are three types: major, medium, and minor. Major ones consist of a large number of these, while medium have a lesser count, and minor ones contain the least amount among them.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of intramuscular injection is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of intramuscular injection is this way:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of petite is this in English. However, if you are referring to the word 'petite' as an adjective meaning small or diminutive, it would remain 'petite' in both French and English without a change in spelling but with different pronuncicuation. If you meant something else by "esta", please clarify your question so I can assist you better.
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Ironically, in the presence of allergens, extreme temperatures, and skin conditions such as eczema or psoriasam, one may experience worsening symptoms due to an increase in inflammation associated with these factors.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	Here are these experiences of the forms, and they are named in Hebrew, and one of them is called Beriah.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	There are three types of spices in this dish - garlic, pepper and a little bit of salt.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The great experience of lighting.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of mixed experience, the form of light:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of Pauca (Latin for "few" or "a few"), in the sense of 'lu' which likely stands for "light": A light and sparse form. In English, it could be described as a minimalistic, airy structure or composition that embodamoins simplicity and space.
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	I'm referring to those swellings, boils, abscesses and other similar conditions that occur due to causes such as issues with the bones or for other reasons. In modern English, this could be rephrased as follows: "I am speaking of swelling, boils, abscesses, and other related ailments that arise from situations involving bone problems or various other causes."
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	Let's reverse the text and translate it to English again: "Let's begin with large beads, which are made of amber, or silver, or copper, or gold; the largest ones being those made of amber."
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	E is fascinated by dark plums, which agree that those are abundant in the cavities where they reflect upon each other's levity through these reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	I will use three species of spices; for the larger ones, use cloves, and for the others, mix in some birds-eye peppers, according to the amount of filling within the sausage casing and the tightness of its skin.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of large lead experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of mercury drop:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Little Prince Cloud Shape:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the nouns are declined into cases and numbers, where some consist only of simple forms, to which there is only a curve, and of three genders: masculine, feminine, and neuter.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	B - One pound of freshly ground beef (preferably sirloin), and three spices of choice.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"E equals the number of circles that have no curves and also three species."
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	A sphere has three curved surfaces, and comes in three varieties.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	E = mc^2 is a formula by Albert Einstein, stating that energy equals mass times the speed of light squared. This equation explains how much energy an object has based on its mass and the constant speed of light. Understanding this principle is essential in fields like physics and astrophysics to comprehend fundamental concepts such as nuclear reactions and cosmic phenomena.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Simple form of the verb "to be" (be) in past tense and plural form.
Forma de unci simple migier:	English translation: Simple past tense form.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Simple past tense and present perfect form of the verb "to come" in English.
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a round pear: Oval-shaped with a slight curvature at the top and bottom, tapering towards the stem. The body is generally wider in the middle and has a smooth skin texture that can range from green to yellowish hues depending on ripeness.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of one and other, form of love.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Two forms of the word 'orange' in Catalan are "taronja" and "auró".
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of an oval with two curves.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of an almond macaron that has two curves is known as a "double-curved" or "bi-lobe" shape. This type of macaron features a distinctive silhouette with two rounded, symmetrical peaks on either side of the cookie. It's a popular design for special occasions and can be made using various flavor combinations to match different themes and preferences.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape with few curves or two bends.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of an oval with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of an S with three curves.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	Here are the forms of the scalpangs which are sharp and pierce thorns, sores, and boils; there are three kinds, one being large, another medium, and a third small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Large sewing pin (or thimble) holder/organizer:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the shoulder blade:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the Scalpel Pauc: The scalpel Pauc is a surgical instrument used for making precise incisions during medical procedures. It consists of two main components: a handle and a blade. The handle typically features an ergonomic design, providing comfort and control to the surgeon or physician holding it.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The sharp stones and the others that are not-sharp and not placed in such a manner, but rather made to gently remove the scarring of nodes due to fear of vein or nerve injury, and for those who have been healed from the disease and achieved peaceful tranquility, a small adjustment is needed which prevents further scarring during the removal of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the different types of soups and they come in three varieties: thick, medium, and thin, just like broths.
La forma de magda gran:	Magda's Grand Formation, or in Spanish "Formación Maestra de Magda"
Forma de magda migier:	Title: "Magdalene's Guidance"
Forma de magda pauc:	Title: Magda Pauck's Creative Process: A Glimpse into the Mind of an Artist
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	The fairy tales of yesterday and the stories of today both convey a message about the dangers of alcohol consumption.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	"E" is the letter on the keyboard that is slightly to the right of 'A' and hidden behind it; move in those directions when you wish, as you would with any other key.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of Spathum hissilis, which I have touched among the words you gave me about the puncturing of abscesses and not feeling the pain in them, there are three kinds: large, medium and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	Spanish: Esta es la forma de los aquellos.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of veins in which the blood flows away from the vessel, and there are three types; large, medium, and small; the forms of them are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These lemon tarts have a circular shape and are subtly flavored.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	This translation into English would read as follows: "E cove que sian aquestes types of suction cups you should have large, medium and small ones; for those abscission flows with high velocity in emergencuesss, and hours when your first aid does not suffice."
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, asì cum en les llagutxines de las caballos y d'autres animales domestiques, e en els llagutxins dels braços, e dels mamells i del ventre i dels ingomas, i semblants a llurs dels llagutxins carnoses humits.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some incisions are made with instruments similar to small scars from scratches on the skin according to this method; by which the wound is separated when performed by phlebotomy or vein ligation, or using a lancet.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some pies are round in shape according to this form. (In English, "veguades" could refer to a variety of pastries or cakes, but without specific context, it's difficult to determine the exact translation.)
Capitol .xlvii.	Here is the translation of "Capitol" into English:
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Treatment of the male breasts, which are composed by females.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	The text you provided seems to be in the Català language (Catalonian), and it appears to have some typographical errors or may not make complete sense due to misspellments or incorrect word usage. However, I'll do my best to provide a translation based on what's given:
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	To heal the wound caused by that which you desire water (semen), cut into those dry moist patches according to this method, from line B to line G, and carefully remove all impurcuities. Then place a warm poultice of medicinal herbs on it, and properly secure the lips of the wound with sutures, and heal whatever is inside that has been sanitized.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Mays, the mammary gland descends from previous parts and is modified for its magnitude so as to endeavor towards women, hours being split in two halves they seem like lunar figures, each one contained within the other; that is where the line of A contains B and the line of G. And accordingly adjust the cord (of the nipple) which lies between two lips of the areola, remove any excess tissue, and apply as we have mentioned in regard to suturing and powders that are necessary for healing while it is recovering.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not fulfill the obligation of ensuring that no water pollution occurs due to your negligence and resulting bodily injury, at all times you must prevent any flooding caused by submerging objects in corrosive liquid or substances which can cause it to rust. Also ensure safety within the area where this corroded object is stored until it has been properly cleaned up.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capital Letters (Capitals): Chapter LVIII
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	From the puncture of abscesses that have arisen, relief may come forth.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Aquetz apostemas that come from eating the spices of scrofula, thistles, which a peel tells about.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	In those cases where there are humors; and those containing humors that should be drained by the lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the lineebetween lines of G and B. And once all water is evacuated in the abscess of the disease, within a day or two the swelling diminishes completely.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	A proper care and treatment with an appropriate remedy for water is what has always been done and will continue to be practiced as long as it remains effective.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	The apothecary's remedies for the warts and scrofula are separated into two sections as we have mentioned in this section regarding scrofula ingestion.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the fire is spreading faster than grass or dry leaves, then manage it according to the current situation that we have mentioned earlier.
Capitol .xlix.	In English, the Roman numeral XLIX represents the number 49. The letter "X" stands for 10, and it is placed before an "L", which denotes 50. Each of the following lower-value symbols (I) subtracts one from the value above them. Therefore:
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Fragment of a thrombus that occurred during an arrhythmia or in the vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the arched artery is ruptured and the cord (vein) above it becomes engorged with clots, leading to inflammation or thrombosis in the artery or vein: when thrombosis occurs in an artery, it extends long along the limb; and if you push against this thrombus, you feel a stridor there.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	That which is poured into the vein becomes dear to him who witnesses its course.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Section on this gangrene is wrong and mostly in the one who leaves his socks untied, as well as in the toes, and in the neck, and in other parts of the body; it is a serious matter that care should be taken for its prevention and if present at the extremities or head, they should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Here is the translation in English:
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	The master explained to the apprentice about that needle and showed him how it can penetrate into another length, then suddenly the archery caused a double hole in two places, which I have seen before in extracts from both temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	A prop of the place located between two landmarks is applied which causes all that exists within to be ignited and the abscess to be dissolved completely.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Article L213-8 of the French Civil Code states that "The party who is at fault in causing damage shall be obliged to repair it, as well as any resulting loss or depreciation; and to provide appropriate medical care for those injured within a reasonable time." English translation.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If you have an inflamed vein section (phlebitis), cover the area with your hand and as much cold water as possible to ease the swelling at the site of the inflammation, then carefully reinsert the needle that was used by your doctor into the same spot. Make sure the needle goes in between the two layers that you pulled apart earlier and attach a syringe filled with medication according to the instructions provided for treating phlebitcuits (ulcers) on both ends of the vein, connecting them together as directed.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Mays fears that they will extract the thread, so he/she inserts their faithful needle again and pulls it out of the infection caused by the first needle, and strengthens his/her four limbs with it.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Avoid getting sunburn in the area of your skin that you frequently expose to sunlight during hours when ultraviolet rays are most intense (usually between 10 am and 4 pm), and limit exposure duration so as not to overheat or get dehydrated.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	A physician with expertise in respiratory problems has immersed the pulverized medication into water or oil, and then administers the curative treatment that was made using a combination of substances which have resulted in healing.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital L of the amputation causes severe nerve damage.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Ayssi suffers from herpes simplex in the armpit and veins, and similarly causes herpes outbreaks in the nerves due to irritation or excessive rubbing, as well as similar symptoms.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	C) The grain of the corn should be harvested by the aids or on the ground in any location where the joints are healthy.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	A is an abscess of great severity, and it appears in the same color as the surrounding skin, and is located at the site of its origin, with a very strong feeling of heat; there'n lies the appearance of illness-induced stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	In English, the sentence would be translated as follows: "E is not included in the head of the link, and it is just left behind the code, and it is bad for all parties involved and does not go to previous or subsequent links."
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	The text provided appears to be written in Catalan:
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	The one who is on the head or forehead has a tangle in the hair.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the hernia is not too large and it has been present for a short time, you can opt for conservative treatment with pain relief and close monitoring of any complications that may arise.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is great, appoint some of your servants to carry him on a bed, and another to go before him, and a third to announce his approach. Then set the curtains straight in his path; and when he is inside that has been made well, attend carefully to his needs until fully recovered.
Capitol .li.	Capital.LI is the country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Liechtenstein, a small European nation located between Austria and Switzerland. It was officially assigned to Liechtenstein on March 18, 1amo. The domains under this ccTLD are primarily intended for entities with a connection to Liechtenstein, such as businesses, organizations or government agencies registered in the country. However, there's no restriction on who can register these domains; individuals from other countries can also obtain them if they wish.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Section of mumps that causes swelling in the lips and abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	In the endo-vaginal canal of those and in other parts of their vagina, there are spots resembling fungi, wherein the consistency is subtle but the head of that which it simulcuates is large; and already the lips of such become corrupted, and from them arises something small yet magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	On that day, there were two things in his belly which seemed like fungi; they did not differ much between those white ones, very small in size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	His lips were curled and split, with a continuous flow of moisture all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	You must descend into those and advance on the one in page eighteen, section XVI. On the other side, there are some cows.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	The operation concerning the humors in case of illness is as follows: If the malaise is hot, and the color of the urine is white, watery, with a subtle taste; then you should insist on the hours being cold, and be present to warm it up. As for the discharge that comes from this area, if there are blood clots expelled, cauterize them immediately. And if they flow out as a current of blood, apply cauterization to that part.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If you suffer from anxiety or fears, avoid excessive worry and stress; instead take a handful of freshly ground lavender flowers twice daily, and strengthen your resolve with this herb, the source of which we have previously mentioned; use it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	B to tighten within the wire loop; thus, do not cease pulling on the iron rope in the middle so that it is divided and falls apart by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	May's silence is of great importance to her anxiety, especially during the times when she feels afraid and scared, particularly for those who are in labor.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It's possible that you could split the bulk of her, and use this method to burn those who don't return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	A proper shelter within which the storm is resolved.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Look that you do not assume to enter into the area where there is a dark spot, which has little feeling and is very carefully guarded, because it contains an abscess.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	Aye, let us remember the wise owl as we delve into its fascinaturio.
Capitol .lii.	In this passage, the author is discussing various aspects of capital punishment as it pertains to different countries and regions around the world. The topics covered include death row prisoners in China who were found innocent but executed nonetheby their superiors due to personal grudges or disputes, capital offenses such as murder or treason that may result in a death sentence, and how certain nations have abolished the use of the death penalty for specific crimes. The passage also touches upon methods of execution used by various countries like hanging, lethal injection, firing squads, beheading with a sword, and electrocution. Furthermore, it mentions that some prisoners may spend several years on death row before their sentence is either commuted or they are executed.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	The term for "de curacio de eminencia del umbilic" in English is "high-level curative of the navel." However, this seems to be a mix-up as there are no such medical procedures or treatments known by that name. If you're referring to something related to umbilical care, it could possibly mean advanced treatment or specialized therapy for issues around the belly button area. Please provide more context if needed.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The umbilical hernia in eminence is hidden due to various reasons such as diastasis of the linea alba which lies on top of the abdamoent; or for fissures in the abdominal wall, or scar tissue following other ruptures. It may also be concealed because of a swollen vein (hydrocele) that runs forward according to how it is mentioned above with other hernias, or due to coarctation caused by excessive scarring in the area.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If Mays is due to a cerebral fissure and for the sediments of the fabric, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the core; and it has severe pain and appears from different situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is by the grace of God, at this moment in that realm beyond water which we have recounted, with even more fervent diversity, and as you place your hand on those very words I am concealing, and promptly return; there will be great joy for you, and magnificently, a wealth of blessings shall follow.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	During rainy days, the hours are long and bright when you touch your mother's hand, there is no pressure or belief.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is for the sake of rhyme, hours are here in these lines with their signatures fading into night.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	It seems that you're referring to the Mayo Clinic, a non-profit medical center known for its high quality care and extensive research efforts. If there are any complications or infections after receiving treatment at the Mayo Clinic, they may become severe, large, hard, and last for a certain period of time. However, it's important to note that such cases are rare due to their adherence to high medical standards.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it's windy, the hours belong to Leo in astrological terms.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The operation in question involves considering the prominence of the umbilicus for suture, or veins, or swelling; this means you should avoid such treatment during its care as there is fear and pain akin to those mentioned in the chapter on abscesses via arteries or veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	The prominence of the umbilicus is usually due to the underlying connective tissue, hours away from any malfunctions that you may have, and should be extended; and try to feel around in the entire circumference of the umbilicus, and command it (the area) to stay towards your upper abdomen, and circumscribe a wide band along the circumference of the umbilicus over the location which you just touched, extending as far as possible from the original lesion; and firmly press around in the circuit with either forceful strength or gentle pressure using an appropriate massage movement.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	A: In case of an emergency with an extended abscess affecting the limb and interfering with your movement, you should seek immediate medical attention. If the wound is already examined or supervised by healthcare professionnals, inform them about any changes such as spreading redness around it (possibly indicating an infection), increased swelling, heat on touching, pain or pus formation from the abscess.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	Once he had stolen the fabric, he spent hours on that one; and he eliminated any excess threads.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Mays if you are against your archery or vein, do not use that method and instead return to your usual practice; then take two needles and insert them into those strong points and gently guide the needles around the circuit you have created around the abscess in a cross shape. Then strengthen the abscess by dividing it into four parts with the help of the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, remove the needles and cut into the place where the flesh is extended and let it drop off by itself; or pierce that part when it becomes subtle and rotten, and apply near it an ointment containing herbs through which it may be healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the omphalos eminence is of no skin or perhumidity, then carefully cleanse that area and apply an antimicrobnial agent as we have mentioned earlier, along with keeping it dry; maintain this by using a dressing and the appropriate amount of water to keep the site clean.
Capitol .liii.	Act III, Scene iii of Shakespeare'amoor in his famous play "Julius Caesar" depicts the conspiracy against the titular character and sets into motion a series of events that lead to tragedy and upheaval within the Roman state. This pivotal scene occurs at Brutus' residence, where he is persuaded by Cassius and other senators to join their plot against Caesar. The conspirators argue that Caesar's ambition threatens the Republic, and they convince Brutus that assassinating him would be for Rome's greater good. This act marks a turning point in the play as it establishes the motives of the characters while also showcasing themes of power, loyalty, friendship, betrayal, and the complex nature of politics.
De curacio de cranc.	Cure of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have stated that in the division of this particular type of crustaceans, namely crabs, and the ways they are affected by healing through medications, as well as being susceptible to ferrum (iron) overuse which can cause ulcers; and we have mentioned that crabs undergo a process similar to our own healing.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	"For some ancient ones who live in places where eradication is possible, like the weed which grows in patches on land or near bodies of water and seems to spread its roots throughout that area, particularly when it starts out small."
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	Old Mays Quan is brown and rough in color; I cannot cover it with you, for we do not know how to cure this old tree or have seen any others like it reach water.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The operation here is when we allocate such as we have said, it is that you proceed and leave the bad luck and purge of black plague some days away, and approach with kindness whoever, if so verified a noticeable change occurs.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	A prepares the illness and the remedies therein, as well as those in which they are located or used, so that harmful effects may not occur during use; and you shall avoid any abuse of these remederial means without a valid reason to justify such behavior.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Layla quickly ran to the scene and immediately assessed it. She pressed her cloth firmly against the wound to absorb as much blood as possible, making sure she used an item that was clean and sterile among all available tools at hand.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you are bothered by a large swelling of veins or an artery, at the moment when the blood flow stops, and with great care apply heat to that area until it is healed, and in the meantnent continue the treatment as needed for complete recovery.
Capitol .liv.	Capital.ly
De curacio de ydropici.	Treatment of diabetes.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have mentioned, in the division, of water treatment techniques and the characteristics of each technique as well as their use in medicine preparation.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	The kind of algae that is cured by iron is not just the species of Althetis alone; it is not closely related to the species of Timphanister nor to the species of Yposarchus, for which one is lethal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	Evanthius Judaeus discusses this type of tympanic illness in his book "Tractatus de Medicina". He advises not to share your medication with others because if the disease has been overcome or if it is another form of illness, then treat as though you were dealing with fever or stomach issues and similar ailnments. Therefore, avoid using iron-based medicine unless absolutely necessary, for fear of causing harm.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you suddenly suffer from an excess of indigestion and it's not another illness but merely dyspepsia, neither child nor old, the recommended procedure to treat your condition is as follows:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Two sharp angles long, with an acute extremity just like a spatula; however, it should be in some small narrowness little by little, so that in the operation such a one does not pass through into the stomach, and all of that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	E proposes if the generation of droppings is from the belly button, as it seems that your child has the urge to pull at the area around the belly button for about three times in a row on top of the pillow, how should you address this issue?
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	The incidence of hydrocephalus is not related to the gender or handedness of an individual; it affects both males and females equally regardless of whether they are left-handed or right-abdominally (presumably referring to a location on the body). It occurs due to problems with cerebrospinal fluid dynamics within the brain, which can happen for various reasons.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	Se generează făcea lucului pentru a proteja toamnele, astfel răspândindu-i în partea mâinile acelor lor, și orice secție ai lucului este pe la dreapta datorită curentului.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	In the same bay where your section lies along the coast, let's converse about matters so important that unnecessary chatter does not disturb anyone at that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	E approaches the instrument completely covering the codex, and interferes in that section, and elevates your arm's length between the codex and its shaft, and you scrape off that amount of a wing or two.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	C) Upon reaching the desired depth, insert the probe into the soil until you encounter water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	In English, this would translate to: "A person who interferes with an instrument in which the following form is used."
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	"The item is a silver canula (tube), crafted from either sterling silver or fine silver. Its design features a lion's head handle and in the lower part of it there is a small cross. It also has three clasps on its sides - two on one side, and one on the other. The extremity is pierced according to the shape of a feather quill:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	E is the lesser evil of its more powerful neighbor and it means armlet or bracelet; when the device comes into contact with water, hours later it releases an amount of water at the most opportune time, so if you release that amount too soon or too late than what's needed in that hour, then there may be severe consequences for the resolution of your spirit animal, or it leads to a close encountering of death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Mayse vacates from there according to the amount of virtue possessed by them and according to what they mean in your interpretations of their acts of virtue as well as their character's goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here's an English translation of the text:
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	A) Adjust the instrument periodically to ensure other times the tolerant quantity of water is accurate, and extract a small amount of water for analysis over several days out of fear, but be careful not to disturb the water so much that it causes contamination or loss.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are afraid of illness and see a large quantity of water, bury that man in sandy soil, and spread butter on his body, then let him lie under the sun for a long time; cure that man with desiccating medicines if he recovers.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	B burns on the stomach, and the swelling and pain caused by it are relieved through water extraction, as I have described in the passage that follows.
Capitol .lv.	The Capital, also known as capital.lv in some contexts, is the official seat of government and administrative center for a country or state. It typically hosts key institutions such as legislative bodies, judicial courts, and executive offices that are essential to the governance and functioning of the nation. Additionally, capitals often serve as important cultural, economic, and historical centers within their respective countries.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	From the curage of children, which we do not know the locations in the urine that are non-porous.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are born with a condition in which the umbilical cord remains connected to the belly button of their mother and the top of its mixture is not pierced or it's tightly cut off. In English, this refers to an "umbilical hernia." This occurs when part of the intestines protrudes through a weak spot in the abdomninal muscles near the navel (belly button). The umbilical cord usually detaches and heals after birth; however, if there is an opening left or it doesn't close properly, it can result in this condition. Umbilical hernias are more common in infants and young children but may also occur later in life.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Once a little boy was playing near the forest edge. He looked curiously around, noticing how quiet and still everything seemed. It wasn't long before he stumbled upon something strange - an old wooden chest partially buried in the leaves. With trembling hands, he opened it to discover that inside were countless small coins of gold glittering softly under the sunlight filtering through the trees.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	A prop of a nail subtle of lead and tin that one, and for three days or four nights (in the Bible).
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	E quickly vomited up the orange juice and coffee; then he drank that back again.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you don't close the faucet, it is possible that the urine which falls on the floor won't soak in this hole.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	The remedy of which we previously spoke, applied to the knee joint affected by osteoarthritis and found effective, should be continued for several days until noticeable improvement is seen.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	In the places where there is an obstruction to urine flow, which causes from these obstructions, that person who was born and whose urethra is unable to pass urine at its exits, while it rises in his body up to the penis; and this is not of all people, because as a result semen cannot reach the female according to nature, resulting in an impotent malady.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation for this treatment is that the malady is attached to your head, and then you firmly grasp the top of its tail with your left hand, and sharply cut off the tip of the tail's head at the location where it pierces, as if sharpening a quill. Do not leave any part intact so that the creature appears to have no head, but instead resembles the top of the tail, allowing its blood to drip according to gravity.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	In your surgical procedure for blood flow management, many times there are accidental cuts that occur there; and stop the bleeding with an agent that separates the blood, and treat the wound inside which has healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI, English Edition.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	From the beginning of gonorrhea, there are inflammations in the foreskin and head of the glans as well as erosion, discoloration (blackness), and adhesion to the foreskin at the tip of the glans.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	The goat'amoeba often causes this inflammation in the bladder, and it is an important cause of urinary tract infections.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	One is benign while the other is not benign (or malignant).
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	The instruction provided appears to be in an invented or obscured language rather than recognizable English. It seems like it's meant to convey a recipe for a healing ointment with various ingredients. However, without understanding the language, I cannot provide you with its translation. If this is from a fantasy universe or game, there might be a specific context that could help decipher it. Could you please clarify where this text comes from or give more details?
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If albuterol is indeed harmful, of great concern to you as it affects your breathing and the reason for using it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	In Mayo-June, the foreskin of the head of the penis is not circumcised, and one part of the frenulum is within the foreskin while the other part extends beyond it; therefore, you should remove the excess tissue that protrudes into the opening once it has healed. Now treat the remaining portion, as when you excise this tissue from the prepuce, there is no assurance that it will not be torn again.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	The priest's hands are not clean from the genital heresy and pollution; therefore you should have tried to purify all that has been defamed and is tainted with corruption or about to be so; rather than doing nothing, take a look at this method of cleansing which consists in using flour made from millet and barley grains ground into dust.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	A is responsible for the other's health within which it remains healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Mays suffers from a constant flow of blood, and during the moon'cuarterly phase, he follows this treatment method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The wound heals in stages, with the formation of granulation tissue and then scarring when it becomes damaged.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the foreskin is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, cover that part with a lead tube such that it prevents harmful urine from coming into contact with that area.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In cases where the prepuce is fused with the head of the glans (and this fusion only occurs in those whose foreskin is too tight, and on which circumcision is not required; and when it happens due to scrotal swelling or inflammation) it requires that you excise with a blunt spatula until the adhesion dissolves completely and the head of the glans protrudes entirely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	It's quite difficult to determine those exquisite moments of time which you might describe as "alcuna causa del cap de la verguamo e del prepucii." So the prepuce, when it is subtle, can easily be pierced by its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	A prop separates between the foreskin and the head of the penis, which is usually moistened in warm water so that it does not stick to any other fabric during circumcision.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	"Ensure that the content is appropriate and remains consistent within its established context."
Capitol .lvii.	In English, "CAPITOL" is the term used to refer to a building where a state or national legislative body meets to conduct its business. The word also refers to the Capitol Hill neighborhood in Washington D.C., which houses important government buildings such as the United States Capitol itself.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	The miraculous healing of children and the cure for those afflicted by the effects of circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to continuity nor other diseases: however with its own work and our will, and use of that which is proper for children, it is necessary that we assign it in the best possible way to improve health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	In the past, it was not customary for freemen to perform circumcision, as they did not practice such in their laws and customs. This is simply because we have acquired through experience that most craftspeople and barbers use circumcision with a scalpel or scissors; they employ thread on the penis and sterilized oil from a quill.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	In the past, various methods have been used to circumcise boys and men, such as using an instrument like a scalpel or forceps, which can lead to more harmful outcomes than beneficial ones. The procedure involves cutting off part of the foreskin, leaving behind two layers of skin on the penis shaft, and sometimes even removing it completely, leading to increased risk of infection, pain, and discomfort.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	"E is a circumcision performed for health reasons and involves the removal of the foreskin, which barbers commonly use; however, there is no assurance that it completely eliminates the risk at the tip of the penis as some may still experience discomfort during sexual activity."
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation room, I will use a metal tool and compromise your procedure.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's genitals are short by nature, and many stay this way without any need for intervention or modification, which I have also seen.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The immense work that God does through the sword and lamentation is indeed holy, for both instruments are of proportionate use, because the sharpness found above is just as much as the sharpness found below; hence with you touching your own proportional swords, you shall cut accordingly in exchange at a given time; and it is made into compression forming the figure containing the code of the tail's vertex on all parts without any error whatsoever.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first procedure of the operation is for you to mainly be present if it involves a child, and not just supervise them but also hold their hand throughout the process, enscuintado that you review everything with them the following day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	B) To the extent possible, avoid actions that would harm your own well-eudaimonia or that of others within your community.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Aprop, ensure that the item you want to keep is among your most cherished possessions and not centrader; and hide the tools in your pocket or under your shirt so that the child does not see them or any other of those devices.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Insert your hand into the water gently and blow on your fingertips, then pull out whatever has settled at the bottom of the water; this should be the dirt or impurities that have accumulated in it.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	A rectangular signet stamp would be folded in half twice, and then pressed firmly on the lower part of the same piece, and your thumb inserted between two layers to apply pressure and leave an impression.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Elevate the cod fish suspended by a rope, ensuring its head is slightly raised while allowing it to bleed out gradually in small amounts, as this yields better results. Place a cloth over and under the fish, into which mugwort oil has been freshly extracted mixed with rose water; layer these each day for several days until the fish appears cured.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the haircut is changing, this form is called a "pixie cut". In Spanish, it could be referred to as una "cortinilla" or "estilo pixie."
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Sian some untrimmed nails and others trimmed, but neither is it necessary to cut the nail tip exactly like two blades of grass equally in length as their widths.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The error in May's misunderstanding is that he/she entirely escapes the underlying code, or a portion of it, from his/her perception.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Sure! The phrase "Doce cove q'ieu estenda aquei per lo meu horari allar l'ungla dins l'espai i que escrivis alli amb igualtat" is in Catalan language and it means, "Tell me to extend that there for my hour hand inside the space and you write it with equality."
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you do not keep it in your glove, the hours can become cold and harsh on that hand and cause chafing or blisters.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	Mays has had three days of fever and rash that appeared after the snake bite. In four hours, you should see if there's any sign of swelling or infection at the wound site, and carefully remove any clothing stuck to it. Then, clean the area according to what you have prepared for such a situation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Look at the top of the rope ladder; we will not reach it there.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Hence, be careful with that water which contains the powders we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If the sentence is incorrect in terms of grammar or syntax, then please correct it. Otherwise, here is the translation: "If something goes against my will and follows unusual rules that I do not know about, this does not concern me."
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	Certain herbs, when used in the proper way with water as recommended, can have healing properties.
Capitol .lviii.	The text in question refers to a specific page number, "capitol lviii," which is likely from an English publication or document that utilizes Roman numerals for its pagination. In this context, the reference appears to indicate content found on page 68 (since LVIII is the Roman numeral for 68). To provide a proper response, additional details about the subject matter or title of the work being cited are necessary.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Retention of urine in the bladcule's care/treatment.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladaturay is caused by obstruction or blockage due to a stoneor calculithat, or as a result of inflammation or similar conditions discussed earlier regarding treatment methods in that section.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not passed and it becomes like a stone in the bladader's urethra, then you must believe that this illness has lodged itself on its nerves.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	A prop comes the weight of that upon his back and extends his stomach from the side past over his back, and the malady tightens its grip on him as much as it can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the bladder neck is stretched causing expulsion of the stone towards the back, so that the urine flows completely.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If it has not been dissolved in water and what we have said vehementamely holds true, then let us provide the extraction of a substance called "syringue," which is to be made as follows: It shall be of silver and subtle lion's claw. In a similar fashion to an asp-eater cannula with a length of nine fingers and one line, having a subtle tip at its end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of collecting urine for this test is by taking the sterile container and inserting it into one of its extremities, either at the top or side, ensuring proper closure; then introducing the tube ends in the outer opening of the catheter, gently guiding them through any obstruction caused by lumen size while avoiding excessive force that may damage the catheter. The catheter is then carefully inserted into the urethra with a gentle but firm approach and finally secured to prevent any leakage or displacement.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	The fisherman cast a net over the sea, and hooked its gills with his bait of worms and oil, and garlic and olives.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	In the event of impotence affecting the penis size, and if it is caused by an abnormal curvature (Peyronie's disease), there are several steps to alleviate this issue; firstly, consult with a healthcare professional for proper diagnosis. If Peyrone's Disease is confirmed, various treatments may be available including oral medication such as colchicine, injections directly into the plaque causing curvature, and surgical correction options if necessary. It is essential to follow your doctor's guidance on treatment plans for optimal results and avoid self-treatment methods that might cause more harm than good.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Over time, the dye fades from the wool gradually as the urine sets into it.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Apply extraz (suppositories) externally to that area and make sure the urine is clear; use a language, no discharge of water and insert suppository into the bladebag using your fingers, which helps alleviate prostate infection symptoms.
Capitol .lix.	The English equivalent of the domain name "Capitol.lix" would be a creative adaptation, as ".liamo" is not a standard or recognized TLD (Top-Level Domain) in the official domain name system hierarchy. Assuming you are looking for an imaginative counterpart with similar sounding structure and context related to capitals or legislation, one could consider "Capitol.gov", "Capitol.ukparliament" or even a more generic ".com". However, without knowing what the ".liam" extension represents exactly, it's challenging to provide an exact English equivalent. It is recommended that you clarify the meaning of ".liam" for a more accurate translation if it pertains to a specific region, organization, or system.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Qualities of the cathartic clamps, such as their water tightness and compatibility with similar instruments that are in sync with a particular body of water.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	In cases of vesical ulceration or abscesses, hemorrhages, or deep wounds in that area, or if there is a contusion causing pain, one may opt to inject fluids and medications into the affected region. An instrument called a catheter (referred to as clampcedra in Catalan) can be used for this purpose, which is essentially how this method works:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	Although on the one hand she is deaf in her left ear, on the other hand it's closed (referring to an object or space being shut).
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place, there are three roads: two from the first direction, as well.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In cold weather, in which it is immersed, and where the second quantity that fills that up equals its expansion, within which any matter is drawn from the humidity by that, is driven back, and when expelled long distances, according to what happens with clamped naphtha during sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	To drain moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of the catheter into the moist area, and push out that water which is pushed towards the sides, as the moisture gets drawn into the cavity of the catheter.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	C and expose the prostate to direct sunlight as mentioned in the previous section; and push water into it, for that moisture will be drawn towards the bladastery quickly, and cause discomfort or pain therein.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the crested tyrant flycatcher (subtle is when it's crested), and that shape is...
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	S is made of silver or gold, with the top resembling a small feather and subsequently terminating in a pointed tip.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Preheat the oven to 375 degrees Fahrenheit (190 degrees Celsi cups) and prepare two baking sheets by lining them with parchment paper or silicone mats. In a large bowl, mix together 2 cups of all-purpose flour, 1/4 cup of granulated sugar, 1 teaspoon of baking powder, and 1/2 teaspoon of salt.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	The sperm enters the cervical canal via the vaginal opening.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	The appropriate treatment for urinary tract infections (UTIs) includes antibiotatur therapy, which may vary depending on the type of bacteria causing the infection and patient's medical history. Other measures to help manage symptoms include increased fluid intake, rest, avoiding irritants such as caffeine, alcohol, and spicy foods; urinating frequently to flush out bacteria from the urinary tract; and using heating pads for pain relief. In some cases, a doctor may recommend medications to alleviate discomfort or prevent recurrence of infections. It is essential to consult with your healthcare provider for personalized advice on managing UTIs effectively.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you have no vessel to preserve urine, prepare a pitcher and form a circle with it; then pierce the entire circumference of it and insert a sturdy tube into those holes in such way that it turns as easily as possible. Then attach another circle around it so that the fluid accumulates where you want: humidity, salt, or water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	A prop to you with this tool and make it just as you have made the bladder, and express your intent when the moisture reaches the bladader.
Capitol .lx.	Act I - The Rise of the Capitol
De extraccio de peyra.	Stone extraction.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have mentioned in the division of stones and jaundice treatments, and the difference between stones originating in gallbladders and stones originating in the kidneys, as well as their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	They have placed the stone in which cat surgery has been performed, and sewn up.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone originating in the urinary bladamo is that one which lies within the urinary bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	Well then, let me present to you a brief and clear exposition. This will provide an overview of the topic we'll be discussing today.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	It is said that the stones formed in the bladbean are mostly found in children; and from their symptoms it appears that urine coming out of the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, yet it emerges as sand grains when passed through this stone-forming substance. The painful ailment is characterized by frequent visits to the privy and sometimes blood in the urine; moreover, there may be an unusual odor associated with the condition.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	E is a disease affecting the growth of children up to twelve years old, and it is difficult to treat in adults.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	May's interest has shifted to a different area that involves those people.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	The stone (Kidney Stone) of the one whose stones are larger and whose curability is more likely to be slight is incompatible with that which has fewer stones. And if it is small, it is contrary to those.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Then, come to the cure of that place, who prepares them for dinner and heals all sickness including the one called Cristers which extracts the whole fissure that is present on their eyelids; because this fissure sometimes prevents the entry of a stone causing an infection around the eye socket.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	The stone may move downwards causing discomfort and pain in the lower abdomen or it may descend to the bladebottom or jump from its place occasionally.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	The proper way to empty the bladebag is as follows: Firstly, among your most prepared methods and those you least use, ensure that all things related to it are cleaned up afterward so that the entire process remains organized in terms of categories used previously.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Aprop, quero encontrar essa tinta de cor.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you touch the stone in space, soon you will long for a piece of it back on Earth.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If there are no cats in your house, cover your mouth with your left hand and if the child is unwell or a little boy who has reached puberteit (puberty), touch their genitals with that hand and insert it into their bottom.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Seeking the stone path that you have mentioned before, I proceed onward.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	E gradually descends into the bladder's neck.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	According to the terms agreed upon, and pursuant to that agreement, you shall remove anything within the boundaries of the property which you have mentioned as belonging to you.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	E commands the midwife to press upon his mother'e's bladder; and commands another assistant that at his mother's right hand extend her fingers towards the parts departed from them, and at his mother's left hand another helper retracts the cord attached by means of the parts, in part from the location where the section is performed.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	A rogue satellite encroaches upon the space of which this form is its shape.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	In the field that lies between the hill and the genetius (genius), not in its central part, but to the left of the slope; let a section be drawn over this stone you have chosen on the hillside, and let it be made transversal so that the width at the base is as wide as possible without exceeding the size of the selected stone, which should rest on the lower end of your cross-section.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	Stone sharpening at the edge of which there are some angles and grooveby making it difficult for water to flow smoothly.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	A of that water is the lion'amoor shape, and it is round, and it has been filled with false testimony.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If it's the one with angles and margins, adjust in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If not with a chisel or gouge, you will need to exert force on that (the stone) in such a manner as is decent and appropriate for the extreme end of it - so much so that it adheres firmly to the rock; or if you insert between them a sharp instrument with curved tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you can't get over it, try to take a small break from that for a while and if you feel the urge, cut yourself off with some distraction like reading or hobbies. Also, practice self-care activities like meditation or exercise to help relieve stress.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	The stone is still one piece, the hours before supper you push it to the mouth of the urn and then press onto it; and with a little water also press down on it; gently observe if there are more than two pieces.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is large, long ignorance can lead to two causes of bad outcomes: it may stay in place or move due to continuous drainage of urine, because the location is not fully stable.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Mays administered the injection of flu within a short period after it was outside, or engineered in the rupture of its leashes inside which he extracted that on paper.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Once you have completed your operation, fill the plate with aloe and dragon'nose balm, then strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	As we pause upon that fiery red in oil and egg, with salt and water washed, lest it become spoiled by scum.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	In the third day he let grief wash over his soul and did not sleep through that night.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	"I have cast away from there the water and oil, and I apply now for him those fine ointments and anti-diarrheal remede; in which is his healing."
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Mays if you accidentally get an abscess, inflammatur, and corrosive cuts similar to the appearance of blood as though it were frozen in the bladder, then your urine is forbidden (and this can be known by the discharge of blood in the urine), hence insert your thing there into the wound and extract that sore fluid. This may provoke corrosion and putrefaction of the bladeblack.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	A prop of the plague are wine and water, salt, and opposition to all species, the water that is suitable for use in treating within which one becomes healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	During the entire treatment, please inform your family members about all of the precautions and adjustments needed for the medications prescribed to you on site.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the pebble is small and it's at the root of a vein, and if you put urine on it, then after this treatment you should pour water over the area that has been affected by too much mineralization; and I have already done so. Then take an iron needle (perforator), which has this form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	In English, this phrase can be translated as "A well-sharpened blade, a sharp mind, and unwavering determination." This is an idiomatic expression in Catalan (the language from which the original text seems to come) that emphasizes three key qualities for success or overcoming challenges.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Before the procedure was performed, and as instructed by his doctor, he left behind the catheter stone so that it would not return to the bladatury.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	The iron rod interferes with the wheel's rotation, making it difficult for the driller to bring that rock under control.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	E rotates the drill against your skin on that small rock, and you pierce through as the hole is formed; for a moment, the sensation of pain quickly passes away.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	In the proper usage of this herb found near a rocky area by the footpath where horses graze, that is trodden upon and soiled with urine, its healing properties are activated.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not within your means due to any reason that prevents you from using it at the stone, then a faithful trace of the mark on the stone, and another faithful trace above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	A propeller lies around the rock in that ravine between two ledges.
E aprop extratz aquela.	A brief overview of that is as follows: The United Nations (UN) was established in October 1945, after the end of World War II, with the primary goal to promote peace and cooperation among nations. It currently has 193 member states and its headquarters are located in New York City.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	C is an alphabetic character used to separate words and spaces in written text, making it easier for readers to understand the sentence structure and meaning without confusion.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	E is not necessary to remove the stone from the bladder, but rather that it does not return to the urinary tract; and the other side must be removed upwards because when the gall of the bile attaches itself to the edge of the stone, the cord returns to its place and recovers the power.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	E per aqua es necesario tomar el caldo antes de subir la cuerda hacia arriba, que luego regreses y devuelvas lo pagado como hemos dicho.
Capitol .lxi.	Title: The Rise of the Capital City
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Extraction of stone from women's bodies.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Women are not highly valued by Peyo (Peyra).
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you come across any of these stones, at times the treatment can be difficult, and it is forbidden for those who are not skilled healers.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The one who is poor has a stronger woman than he does.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The second one you don't find a woman who is as brave and capable of discovering if she gets pregnant to the doctor when it happens, or from women who haven't married yet.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one was a great guy who did not have his father with him at this event, mostly the operation was on me.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth place along the section about stones is a boulder in women's land; it lies ahead of the rock location, and so one must look further down the stretch, for there you may find fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	La necessità di May impone all'uomo un certo dovere; in particolare, se assume un ruolo scientifico nel processo decisionale, non deve avere pregiudizi o parzialità nei confronti delle donne.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are deprived of that, the hours will pass quietly and subtly, or present a mature woman who is dressed like women do in this craft, or a woman from the previous chapter mentioned in this section.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	In that present moment and command her to do all that you ask of her, starting from the inquiry about the stone at the meal; this is why she must consider if the woman is a virgin, as it would require putting your hand into her vagina and choosing the right stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If you obstruct that, heave it aside and then order him to inscribe on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If Mays is not the healer, then she instructs the midwife to insert her finger into the womb of the sick woman and feel around for a stone; but if she finds one, she should pause and use her left hand to carefully remove it, ensaturating good practice.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If it were that time, the hours would pass quickly until that of the horrifying event at the bladder's expulsion occurs again in those moments when one reaches the reason for the situation.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Article L.1632-4 - Placement of the boundary stone
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	A little at first; then approach the rope over that section, and feel the stone, shortly adjust it on the section according to the quantity you know the stone will be thrown from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	The rocks of those species are small and few; they have a hard surface, with rough and elongated edges, as well as protruding corners.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	I understand that you are asking for the number of words in French regarding water which mean 'water' in English. The word "eau" is how one would say "water" in French, and it appears to be a single word. Therefore, there is only one word in French meaning 'water'.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you want to stop the bleeding, adjust in the exact location with ice wrapped and apply it for an hour until the blood stops, then return to your work once the stone is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	I who prepare the tools which you use in stone extraction from the mines, that you may be helped by them in your work operations.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you want to cure a wound and know that the bleeding is from an artery which does not stop on its own, then cover the wound with your hand and apply pressure, without moving it; and let go of the rock and do not remove it, because if you do so, the patient will suffer greatly.
E aprop cura la plagua.	A prop cure the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the blood'vein is ceded to the arteries, and the place becomes impoverished, then you return to your duties while the stone has been removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII: Exploring the Influence of Capital in a Free Market Economy
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	An inguinal hernia is a condition that occurs when tissue, such as part of the intestine or fatty tissue, pushes through a weak spot in the abdomninal wall muscles and into the inguinal canal. It's one of the most common types of hernias, with men being more susceptible than women due to their anatomical differences.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Herniated disc is not just an accumulation of moisture in the white matter; it is a condition whereby nerves contained within the spinal cord are compressed or irritated.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	In some cases, the primary panicle is in the upper part of the plant and it naturally separates from its husk at a stage when there's already another husk present; this remains as the core between the white chaff mentioned earlier, and it is not acorn but tart.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is due to a weakening which occurs at the site where the structures are located, causing these materials to protrude through and some veins may occur as a result of trauma caused on these structures.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	In this humidity there are many colors, because the color of it is changing from yellowish to reddish or pinkish, or black muddy, or watery white, and its water which is more abundant.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	For the signs which enable us to understand this addition of water with that one mentioned here: if it is in white foam, then the stain begins declining a bit lengthwise like a comma, and the current becomes visible, as its humidity contrasts with all around.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If there is moisture on the skin, hours after the healing process starts from the wound and so it seems that another wound occurs.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the humidity is between the knees of the grandfathers and the white ceiling, hours go by without a moment's notice.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	I will attempt to understand the color of moisture and you start describing the color of moisture in the rash area where it's slightly encroaching; then as soon as it is formed on the skin around that area, judge from what it seems like.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we came to the curio shop, hours later we commanded that any malfunctioning items be given an immediate fix if it was within your ability, and sometimes even took care of them for you.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	A) Appropriately adjust yourself onto your back for a little while, and then pause the removal of your sheets.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Place the left hand over your left side and command the minister to follow with their right hand, extending its wrist toward one of two latches on the handle of the incense burner located at the navel point on the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	A-Prenthesis of the chromosome involves splitting the genetic code of each gene along its length in order to place them into proper sequence using a penetrenease.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	C cut a second rectangle adjacent to the line that should be drawn by the generators, until it reaches the white circle encompassing.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	E reject that, and observe it carefully so as to not include any similar items in your selection; the quality of rejection should be thoroughly scrutinamoins according to its quantity within what is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	A propeller pumps are used for moving water and transferring large amounts of it efficiently. They work by rotating blades that draw in water from one location and discharge it at another. This process is commonly employed in various applications such as irrigation, drainage systems, and even marine transportation to move seawater or freshwater.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	"E" separates between the two lips of the section using an incision and do not touch the underlying glands; make incisions as much as you can based on your capability.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	"Even though it's part of its totality or mostly the subtle taste of honey, unless you carefully scrutinize its essence, there is no guarantee that the water will not return."
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Mays, if the prosthesis was removed from outside of your ear canal during the procedure you have performed on the ciphac section, return it there; and then, as close to the other labia of the genial chonchae as possible, ensure that it is sutured in place just like the others, so that it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	Chapter IX - For an Infected or Severely Damaged Tooth
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is divided into two equal parts and one of them turns out to be erroneous, then correct that part according to how you did it in the other half; and if this seems like an error on your side, fix it immediately.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	"Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and ensure they are fully immersed in oil or olive oil. After washing the hair that is submerged in water and oil, spread it over two towels and let them soak up excess moisture. Then remove any folded cloths and powders, and place a linen sheet over your body following this method."
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Craft the following pattern of leather strips and humplaces with woolen cloth; they shall be made from materials that are neither stiff nor damped, and be sewn onto the waistband of the trousers, one end entering the crotch and the other at the base of the penis, two additional pieces over each testicle, and another two on either side. All leather strips shall be properly fitted into the waistband of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	This Hernia is treated surgically by caustery on the spot instead of a section with iron; and you take a fine caustery knife underneprise into the gland ducts, and it is ignited as soon as we have recounted that white phlegm containing water has emerged, then you apply caustery in this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	In English, the letter gamma (γ) is not equivalent to any single English character or sound; however, in mathematics and science, it often represents specific concepts such as the lowercase gamma function, the gyromagnetic ratio, or gamma radiation among others. The uppercase Gamma symbol (Γ), on the other
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	C acts like an enhancer that accelerates the process, and it is effective as long as the entire moisture content has been removed.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Extend the incision slightly, then use caution and precision to cauterize gently with an ignited instrument; next, cut as far as possible within your limits to remove everything entirely; always be careful not to let the heat touch the surrounding tissue. This appears to be a simplified translation of surgical instructions for a specific medical procedure. Remember that actual clinical practice requires extensive training and should only be performed by qualified healthcare professioncuations.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	This procedure is safe and distant from blood flow, making it preferable to the operation on the artery section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If you experience an inflammeball or bleeding during the shaving or burning process, pay attention to which discomfort occurs at that time and treat it accordingly as advised in the following instructions:
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	May I proceed with the second operation because of the patient's severe pain and despite its horrifying nature? Now that you have confirmed it is an inguinal hernia as we discussed earlier.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Lahor's Cove lies near you, standing upon an elevated headland; pierce the abscess with your needle just below its upper edge, and pause the puncture according to the length of the thread.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	A is the large area within which water flows entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	"Even though I stand at the edge of that lake and let my gaze fall upon it, I do so to appreciate the serene beauty of its waters."
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	B) To the extent that it is possible to repair, within which the storm has occurred.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	The obstruction to the flow of water occurs at that moment when you drill into it: and this is done only through white panelling in the orifice of the spring, which causes inconvenience and prohibits the outflow of water, depending on how quickly you put it back. Or adjust a fine for the well as follows; the form of which is described above.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	As waters return to the earth and are gathered again within months or even a year later; and when they are gathered together, hours go by in order that the malady may pass through those days.
Capitol .lxiii.	III. The U.S. Capitol Building
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Title: Understanding Hernias and Their Treatment
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	In the section on this hernia, there is fear of causing harm in major procedures; therefore, to me it seems that its removal and being saved by that better option makes sense.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	Ah yes, I remember that operation on the knee and how it addressed those persistent sprains. It must have been quite an experience for you to go through such a process. How has your recovery progressed since then? Are there any lingering effects or limitations now?
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Well then, I say that the accumulation of gases in the tissues where the nerve cells were formed and is done for various reasons: either due to acute inflammamoinal pain which is drained into the nerves, or as a result of impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	E is the color of the pustule according to the color of the skin, and it is not painful, but it is a serious condition.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	The X-ray shows a calcified lung abscess, which has a dusky color and is not painful.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some wounds are caused by scratches from branches, and by inflammamoins of those scars so much that the memory of it is still noticeable, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	The water that is poured over the inflamed acne area is known for its effect in reducing swelling when applied to your skin; and you shouldn't worry about it stinging too much.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	The one that is made by inflammation of the vein cannot be dispersed by any means without applying pressure to the affected area.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	It is possible that this particular species has been sectioned and on the other parts; so you should note down the code of the genes, then place the scissors at the indicated points above, cut along where it says "ciphac white," and release the suspensory ligaments of the veins, tying them off before releasing that part completely from all sections of the stalk.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the fish bait is that of those mentioned previously, then you should take out the hook and insert it with that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If it is a breach within any of the causes mentioned in this contract or between which it occurs that there are disputes regarding those clauses, then you shall disclose all relevant information related to such breach and damages resulting from it in good faith.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	According to the doctrine of the church, confession is a sacrament that allows for absolution and forgiveness from sins committed in life. Through confessing your sins to a priest in a designated location within the church, you are able to receive guidance on how to avoid these actions in the future. By doing so, one can find redemption and spiritual healing.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	The operation is successfully completed, now please fill the woolen pillow with feathers and oil roseate and violet; then carefully perform the other treatment while it's healing.
Capitol .lxiv.	The title "CAPITOL LXIV" is a Roman numeral representation for the number 64, indicating that this may be Volume 6n of an English language book series or collection titled "Capitol." Without additional context about the contents or authorship of the work, it's difficult to provide further information. However, if you are looking for details on a specific volume in a literary series or publication named Capitol, I recommend checking library databases, online booksellers, or contacting publishers who might carry that title for more detailed information.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Regarding the care of a hernia, it depends on the type and severity. Here are some general guidelines for hernia care:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Phimosis is an inflammation surrounding the foreskin that resembles a small bud and soothes the swelling of the testicles; it makes physical exercise and walking difficult due to discomfort.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	The use of a condom is essential to prevent the spread of this disease due to the fear associated with it, which often comes before the memory or awareness of its consequences.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	Emporio Cove, known for its operatic performances since the beginning.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	I speak of the evil that you do under an elevated axle; and with your hands apply the suspenders to the testicle folds on either side; and in the genital area spread those other ministers who are like me, and stretch them out vehementently.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	A prop inside, it is placed along the vertical section transversely across the right side of the channels within which are found the discovered vessels.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	In English, the phrase would be translated as "Banish completely from your mind whatever you have extracted in exception of arcades that are present within the temples."
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	A rule of thumb is a concept used as a general guideline in decision-making when an exact method or answer is not available or necessary. The term "rule of thumb" may have originated from the practice of using one's thumb to measure something roughly, rather than with precise instruments like rulangs or measuring tapes.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	C) It consists of those within the middle section according to the length of the body and extends thereafter upward where additional moisture has been accumulated due to fertile and decaying conditions.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Article II - Regarding the cure of other diseases and conditions that may arise from infections due to sperm being present on both sides, it is not necessarily harmful for conception by either parent if only one of two genetic factors is involved.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	Mays decides to undergo a vasectomy procedure because he wants all the risks and complications associated with it, such as possible testicular rupture or damage during surgery which may result in loss of nutrition for the vessels, leading to their obstruction, or those that might arise from the surgery itself.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV (65) of "Capitol" is a novel by John Grisham, which revolves around the plot to overthrow the government in Washington D.C., involving several key characters and intricate legal maneuvers. The storyline unfolds as lawyers working for the firm Tyler & Wade come across evidence of corruption within the highest levels of power. As they delve deeper, they find themselves embroiled in a dangerous game that challenges their careers, lives, and sense of justice.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Treatment of an intestinal hernia
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The emergence of this hernia is due to a section that extends into the abdomniferous belly, causing some loops of intestine to pass through that rupture as a result.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This break is either due to a crack or fissure and these two phenomena occur for various reasons: impact, shock, noise, elevation of some heavy cause, or similar factors.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The signal of water, as it extends throughout the pipe system, is that incidents occur rarely and gradually, not suddenly, and it causes swelling inside the first joint for every four pipes connected to the main line.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	E the sign of his leg is in the lower section of the shin bone; and from the beginning it causes intense sharp pain; and there is swelling different from the usual appearance after an injury, with heat emanating from it, and the skin appears to be bruised on either side of the shin.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	In some cases, the intestine may protrude through a weak spot in the abdominal wall, and this type of herniation is called an inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some veins become varicose (varices), and some veins run in the skin fold and get stuck there, causing great harm due to bad health; moreover, these conditions lead to severe pain and worsen especially when they burst.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of spices in this disease, iron is added to instill fear, as it suggests that they should be avoided during hunting.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The mechanism of that operation is to command the evil spirit to return to its abode within the boundaries of its conquest and obey its natural urge to rise above its usual domain over your lands, and elevate those burdens from you.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Cut the tail of the cat, making sure to cut the tissues above and below the testicles all along, and then insert the tail into both lips according to how you wish to moisten the area around those parts. (Note: This is a literal translation but not an advisable practice as it involves harming animals.)
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	Yes, it's the section that depends on how much you have available to make sure that enough is taken out.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Here is the decoded message using Caesar Cipher with a shift of 3:
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit in the water that surrounds your testicle, in the water where there is a white circle, which lies below the tail of the scrotum, and between this circle secondly; and absolve you from that adhesion that exists behind the tail of the scrotum.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	The judge shall instruct the parties to present their case, and accordingly extend the right hand towards the white sheet in his left hand, and raise the head with the right side of the paper; he then commands the minister to extend his hand above and dissolve the attachment that is behind once a satisfactory solution has been reached.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	The circle says there is no reason for the covered cake in white frosting.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you throw away this letter for no reason, then put it in the recycling bin over there.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	C takes a needle with which is filled a large amount of wax, and inserts it into the very last fold, which lies below the scrotal skin, the one that's sebaceous; and he carefully slices off the extremities from the thread within which there are four threads, then forms loops of their ends on either side in a figure resembling a cross. He ties it firmly to the fold mentioned above where we said the scrotal skin is located.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	The French text involves the inflammatur of the limbs and lia those closely bound within which some vessels that do not nourish them cannot transmit any cause for themselves, preventing from here an abscess may occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	After the second resting period follows again according to the first mentioned, without any further delay than three months; and leaving these two intervals allows for the amount of time equivalent to the size of the aforementamoen described, inserting them all around uniformly, and ending with the right side.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Article III. Residue of the Estate in Case of Simultaneous Deaths
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	A isopropyl alcohol immerses the wool bandage in oil and places it on the wound; then applies the leaf which has been rehydrired (and some white patches have been cauterized, which have said to repel the lure of blood flow, as many times accidents happen due to this) and puts the leaf inside that by itself falls off.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If May's plaster is late, hours of water flow down its side, and pause upon that spot where it has been said to fall.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Article: Apropos of the epidemic, one cure is other diseases within which it has been healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	English: Chapter VI (CAPITAL LXVI)
De hernia ventosa.	Ventricular hydrocephalus (also known as "ventriculomegaly"). This condition occurs when there is an accumulation of cerebrospastoid fluid, called cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), within the brain's ventricles due to obstruction or impaired absorption. As a result, this can lead to increased pressure on the brain and may require medical intervention such as surgery or shunt placement.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, there wasn't a single person who had been involved in the healing of his wound.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The first physicians claimed that they had treated it as such in the hernia which is at the vein; the latter being placed near the section above the affected area of heat; and drying up by the blood clot, inside which the vessels run, causing the abscess with the pus that forms there.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	We are sorry for the inconvenience caused and we will work tirelessly to fix it as soon as possible until it is fully restored.
Capitol .lxvii.	In this document, we will explore the history and significance of Capitol Hill, located in Washington D.C., USA. This historic district houses the United States Congress, including the Senate and House of Representatives chambers, as well as numerous offices, committee rooms, and the Library of Congress.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	From the dispersion that is made in the anchovies.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Ciertas ventanas terminan rompiéndose debido a diversos factores como el viento y la edad; sin embargo, hemos dicho que tienen un diseño especial para evitar esto.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	In English: Cells do not leave as a result of any gene in the chromosome; and if they did, it would be rare; and always return to all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If left in the water for an extended period of time, there is a risk of developing cracks within the ice which could cause the boat to sink into the ice; additionally, as the ice expands due to temperature fluctuations (as previously mentioned), it can become less stable and may break apart or form pressure ridges.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The care of her hair is as follows, which is preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Some wounds are cured by applying iron according to this method: and it is that the illness spreads over its own two sides between your fingers, and then dry the spot of rupture using a piece of linen cloth according to the thickness of three times.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Strengthen the encryption method so that it is beyond the cracking capabilities of any codebreaker.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Apropriate the area above the prominent site of the cypher and press that against the belly button.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	The process of applying dental crowns involves carefully selecting the appropriate crown for each tooth and ensnaring it onto the tips of the corresponding root of the tooth, then securing one on top of the other at the junction where they meet.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Here is the text translated from Catalan to English:
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	"E is the treatment for plagues, and by inserting it into wounds, purifies that which is affected and restores the sickness within as long as it has solidified; because if there's an infection and no appropriate dressing applied, there will be a risk of rupture."
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is better in this place because it is more conducive to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Title: English Capitalization (CAPITAL) - Lesson LXVI
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Relaxation of the scrotal cord.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In the text you've provided, it appears to be written in Catalan rather than Occitan or another Romance language of southern France. Here is an English translation:
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	The following is the translation of your text into English: "It is necessary for that which is asked in healing, according to its own will, and then all the knowledge which is soothed upon the natural vein; and let it adjust the lips at the seam."
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If necessary at the beginning of the surgery, three or four sterilized clamps are used to hold and secure the skin while performing a simple incision (laceration) repair.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	The text seems to be written in Old Catalan or another Romance language of the medieval period, possibly Aragonese, which is closely related to Catalan and was spoken in parts of what is now Spain. Based on historical texts available from that region and time, here's a rough English translation:
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX: The Legislative Process and the Role of Congress in Policy Making
De castracio.	At the castle.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	That circumcision in our law is excommunicated, but for certain reasons it should be mentioned to me that I keep in this book; and it is not necessary to remind of it except by two means, one being when he who performs the surgery has knowledge about its treatment if such an event occurs; and the other means are that we sometimes have need of castration for our livestock as with oxen, sheep, pigs, or any similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	So I say that the castle is made in two ways: by cutting stones or by splitting them along their seams.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the event that it should be made, through an act of theater, for us to capture the animal in a water cage while its geniuses are mollyzed and lined up, so they hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Article 1 - Everyone has the right to own property alone or in association with others, without any fear of expropriation.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In English: "Mays's method of castration involves a slit and cutting technique, where you have the animal in front of you and press on the scrotum with your left hand."
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	A applies the sprinklers and discusses how each house is within a specific section that undergoes certain processes.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	A proper nouns that are inside of quotation marks should have the first letter capitalized, as well as any other words in the title except for conjunctions, articles, and prepositions (unless they are the first or last word). For example: "To Kill a Mockingbird," "The Lord of the Rings," and "Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone."
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	In English, the sentence would be: "The law does not speak at all regarding those of the sect except for the subtle one that is on the voids."
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This circumcision method is better the one performed with expertise, for expertise strongly prevents any potential issues with the testicles that may cause discomfort to the animal.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	A) He will take care of the plague until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX (70) in English translates to "Chapter Seventy." This could refer to a specific chapter number within a book or text, such as a novel or historical document like the United States Constitution's Bill of Rights. If you are referring to something different or need more information about this topic, please provide additional context.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Treatment of hemorrhoids.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermafroditism in humans occurs along two lines of development: one is when the sex organs develop ambiguously within the scrotum (in that which is between the testicles, figures a female's pubic hair). This type of hermafroditism involves both male and female reproductive anatomy.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Some ejaculations of that clear fluid which is in the tail of the epididymis, located near the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, the equivalent of a man's scrotum is called the labia majora and it consists of two folds of skin that enclose most of the external female genitalia just like a man's scrotal sac encloses his testicles and penis.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure for arsenicosis involves three species: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	B è che le olive crescono rigorose in mezzo alla fuga dalla difficile situaturile di quella, ed avete cura anche delle altre malattie del vino. (This translation is from the Friuli Venezia Giulia dialect of Italian, which incorporates some Venetian words.)
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second part of human beings whose urine is produced in the kidneps and flows into the epididymis, there is neither curative nor operative effect in it.
Capitol .xxi.	I. Introduction
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The ringworm affects both skin and hair due to female factors.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The translated text in English is as follows: "Lentigo fortis, a benign skin condition, can be triggered by natural causes such as sun exposure or irritation; and occasionally it may become prominent in certain females to the extent that it spreads just like in men and persists even after sexual intercourse."
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Cove that you possess the surplus of knowledge in your hand or on a piece of paper.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	In the latest update of the app, there are significant improvements made primarily in the interface design to ensure that it does not cause any disruption in blood flow.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	B takes care of the healing process of wounds until they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	May's carnascular system is more complex than one might think in the horrific world of human anatomy where it plays a crucial role; hence we must learn about its parts and functions so that we can appreciate how our body works, and take care to keep it healthy. The circulatory system consists of the heart, blood vessels (arteries, veins, and capillaries), and blood. It is responsible for transporting oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and waste products throughout the body. Let's delve deeper into its fascinamoons:
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII (72) of the English Bible is known as Capítulo LXXII in Spanish, and it falls within one of several books depending on which version you are referencing. For instance, if we consider this chapter to be from the book of Ruth or Esther, here'n I can provide an overview:
De curacio de alratica.	The Cure of Arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	The condition of the vagina is that its hymen is not torn or it has a small tear.
E es o natural o accidental.	In English, the note represented by "E" is not categorized as a sharp (♯) or flat (♭), but rather simply as "E." The concept of sharps and flats applies to musical notation in languages like German ("D#" for D-sharp) or French ("Fb" for F-flat). However, the note E remains consistent across different languages, without any sharp or flat alterations.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	The accident occurred due to illness which had preceded it, and that was caused either by no fault of anyone or through a subtle or sudden cause.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	Here is the translation of Article I into English:
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The cognizance of that which is made according to the measure concerns the cask (metrona), if it is filled apparently, proceed; but if not obviously full, then approach that your words or aim at the mark.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	Mays, it's a delicate subject and we should be careful not to offend anyone with our words; let's discuss this topic respectfully.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	E is the one who stops over the two lips' pulse, and he places his fingers to indicate the stronger emotions of the more passionate ones.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should lie down with her back on the table, spreading out her legs, and pressing as far in between them that a thin cushion is inserted and the opening is revealed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Adopting renewable energy and reducing our dependence on fossil fuangs for oil and gas will ensure a sustainable future over there in that location, as long as it is not consolidated at this time.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	The cipher seems to be a simple letter substitution code. To decode it, we can look for common patterns and words in the phrase that might match English language words or phrps:
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	May's opinion seems to be for charity, so she suspends that one unit of money and invests it in a worthwhile cause.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Oh, those bitter medicines that cause a sudden flow of blood! Like aconitum, the blood of dragon, and hemlock, adjusted as an owl's feather.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	A proper administration of a wide gauge plastic catheter ensures that the plaque is not excessively congested.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Your tongue will have those sharp days and the right way is to keep it dry.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	The healing process of one wound should not be prioritized over the treatment and recovery of another injury within which it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Some peculiarities occur during the birth of other creatures, and these occasions require that inscriptions be made according to this manner:
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	The sprain in the foot is not considered as ankle sprain, which involves any injury to the main area without causing discomfort or pain in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII (Capital Letter) - In the English alphanumeric system, Roman numerals are used to represent numbers using letters from the Latin alphabet. LXXIII is a representation of the number 73 in this system, where "L" stands for 50, "X" represents 10 and each successive "X" adds another 10, while "I" denotes one unit. Thus, when combined as LXXIII (50 + 10 + 10 + 1 + 1 + 1), it results in the number 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Title: Treatment for Morphea, Tail and Red Nip Mites Infesting Women's Heads
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	My apologies for the confusion earlier. Here's your corrected sentence in English: "I appreciate these small orifices through which those veins run, and how old-fashioned my emorydals are; they have been made thus." Please note that this text seems to be using archaic language and might not make perfect sense due to possible transcription errors.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	"I shall divide the spices among those who receive comfort and those who do not."
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	I must say that sometimes in life things happen and feelings don't appear to be what we expected them to be. During those times, it is not a reason to become angry or upset because the situation cannot always be changed by force.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those fruits that are in the orchard of the mother over which she feels affection for, those are the ones that have been cultivated with love and care.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	I pray thee set the maid in great fear and bring her to thy axe or some sharp knife, and cut out those red lips.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	A prop also applies to those who have less of the sting from one of these itchy powders, so like cashew and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	C takes off his shoes for an hour, and then puts them back on by the fountain.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	When the blood flows persistently, one can witness signs of fatigue and past struggles manifested through sweating and trembling limbs.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	To prepare the dough for apple and cinnam cups, first mix together flour, sugar, butter, eggs, milk, and vanilla extract until smooth. Then pour this batter over the bottom of your muffin tins or ramekins to form a thin layer.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the sanctions are lifted, he may go outside; otherwise, let him attach himself to two pillows and his nipples should be scarified (a practice known as lanugo).
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Before applying any type of glue to the cracked area, make sure that surface is clean and free from dust or debris. If you are dealing with a small hairline fracture, use epoxy resin as it's suitable for such repairs. For larger cracks in concrete surfaces, consider using polyurethane-based adhesives. Always follow the manufacturer’s instructions carefully when applying glue and allow sufficient time for the product to cure fully before subjecting the area to any stress or load.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	My dear friend, I beg you to carefully consider what I am about to say, which may seem rather blunt, but please understand that it is only for your own good and in the light of the points we discussed earlier.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	He is cured of that ailment within which he was sick.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The term "CAPITOL LXXXIV" refers to the Roman numeral representation for the number 84. In this context, it could be part of a reference or citation related to documents, statutes, bills, chapters, verses, etc., in a legal code, book, manuscript, or similar collection that uses sequential numbering.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Accidental needle stick in the mother during delivery.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various species of boils and abscesses in the mother, as well as crabs (scabies), ulcers, herpes sores, anal warts, and other types of abscesses such as eruptions, furuncles, fistulas, inflammamoia, thyrsus-like lesions, and others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	These are the illnesses and spices of that land, and their signs as well as the remedies for them in division:
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	In this treatise on the identification of inflammamoinal diseases that physicians commonly encounter, and if you wish to know in which manner their treatment is applied.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	I would consider if the pain from the boil is severe at first contact and with a swab, along with fever; whether it sometimes gets redder or forms blisters over that area, and does not hurt after puncturing it; how to cure it using an antiseptic solution during the healing process when the symptoms cease.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And let her cover herself with a mantle over the woman who is about to give birth to children; and recline on their backs and adjust their sides away from the part where the umbilical cord remains after childbirth, and their breasts are extended, and let their loins be free of clothing, so that she can attend to whomsoever she desires.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	The midwife shall then follow the right and proper methods to administer the instrument which is used for dilating the birth canal; the form of which will be determined in those cases that will arise accordingly.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	E cove quan vols ministrar aquesta medicina que tu fiques al ray lla d'la mare, e aquò que del medicament es entrà a la mare no sigui més que·l preon de la mare ni el de la filla malautes.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	The instrument is larger than the mayor's piano, hence you are allowed to play upon the texture of the mayor's piano so that it is forbidden for any other instruments in the mayor's room.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	The priest takes the consecrated bread and places it on the altar of the church, above which the minister holds the instrument and turns the consecraturess inside that it is fully covered by the ornamentation of the mother.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the sun rises and shines brightly, the day begins anew; time passes quickly until you find yourself at my feet once more.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When C is exposed to the air, it's advisebroken for you to pause on a beach where there are rotten or vert oil in an area with any stipulations; and wait calmly at the location before moving forward.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Pause deforestation, the mother and her sons were submerged in water with built-in malva flowers.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	B) Apply the cream twice a day as needed for water-based creams that are recommended until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some washes involve the use of hot water and soap to cleanse both clothing and linens until they are thoroughly sanitized with fresh water, then returning this water through a strainer or laundry wringer.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the flood occurs during your minority (minor), you will have to bear the cost of your care as if it were an accident for which we mentioned remedy in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	English Translation: Chapter LXXV (75) of the United States Capital's Legislative Processes and Procedures, commonly known as "The Congraturations," outlines various stages of lawmaking in Congress. It delves into the intricacies of introducing bills, committee review processes, floor debates, voting procedures, conference committees, presidential action on proposed legislation, and other related topics that are crucial to understanding how laws are enacted at the federal level within the U.S. political system.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	How should midwives ensure that the embryos are healthy when they assume positions outside of what is natural according to Figure?
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The necessary cause for a midwife to know the gestational figure of birth naturally through signs and language is that when you see a woman experiencuing contractions (presumably misspelled as "expremar"), it indicates she desires to smell the air, and at this point she is overcome by labor pains. It's imperative for her to have quick childbirth, so you must understand that this part naturally corresponds to the birth position of the baby, which will be pushed out onto their own head, followed by the second one suspended or hanging from the navel (umbilicus).
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then come thou and perform those signs, the hours that you choose for your belly to become pregnant so that the embryo departs lightly when they descend upon its head, give it a second breath, and free it from those excesses through good hygiene.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	The one that lies here is not natural or justifiable, as when it envelops his possessions and the goods of him are brought before his head and his belongings, and the woman by his side. And the head of him and his hair are white as snow, his face shines like the sun, and his chest resembles a marble statue; from there flows an abundance of radiant light that illuminates all around him, and he exudes such kindness and warmth.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	The necessary cause for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes is that she may guard against errors and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	Indeed! Most scholars believe that the famous sculpture depicts a goddess or a priestess of some kind. However, it's difficult to be certain about the exact identity and significance of this figure as there is not much information available on it. Some theories suggest it might represent a fertility deity, while others think it could symbolize an important cultural heroine or ancestor. The sculpture itself dates back at least 9,000 years, making it one of the oldest known representations of the human form in art history.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	In the original text, a woman is instructed to take certain actions in order to be unfaithful or deceive someone. The translated English version might read as follows:
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	The mite crawls into the small gap between its teeth and enters that second one where there is moisture in it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	E presses the woman's abdomen until she delivers the baby.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If they do not agree, he must obtain a certificate that the woman has been tested for pregnancy with both a peeled plum and peeled fenugreek seed tests.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Here he commands the moon, the stars, that they become cloudy and make it rain heavily so that his foes would get sick soon from cold and dampness; and into the mouths of them and their noses for an hour, four times a night. (Translation by Mireille Saiget)
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If the two dishes were overcooked at dinner, you'll have to gradually reduce them by cooking less in each subsequent meal until you reach your desired consistency.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If Mays does not obey the command, take a pause and have a woman stand on a chair with her legs apart, and then she lifts the weights over her shoulders, and proceed to swing the chair onto the ground; ensure that the woman is securely held so as not to fall during this process.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the turns are not directed and the hours don't matter either, at that time of the year or outside the period of childbirth, with respect to the mother from whom they come or without any relation of equality, this situation will be considered adoption.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The development of the embryo on its back is called "dorsal" or "ventral". In embryology, this refers to the orientation in which the dorsal (back) side faces upwards during certain stages of embryonic development before positioning itself for birth. This process involves complex morphological changes and movements within the mother'cuori'.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	Once upon a time, there were three little pigs who decided to build their own houses. The first little pig built his house out of straw because it was easy and quick to do so. The second little pig constructed his home from sticks for similar reasons. But the third little pig worked hard to make his dwelling strong and safe, using bricks.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	"Lend thy ear to the sounds within these walls, take heed of hours commanded by thee, and let that be expressed without any conditions; though it may seem otherwise, so shall it be if God wills."
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If it is not the high tide that we have mentioned before, your return will come in small steps until you reach the second phase naturally, as this will take several hours during low tide and ebbing.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	The text you provided seems to be in Romanian, but the content appears nonsensical or possibly encoded/encrypted. Without further context or clarification, it's not possible for me to translate this into English accurately. If this is an attempt at translating medical advice or a recipe from Romanian, could you please provide more information or clarify?
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	A prop of water in every house before they experience the pains of thirst.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the matches are no longer lit, you should extinguish them by blowing gently and taking breaks as needed to avoid inhalation of smoke.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	The following is a subpar treatment method lasting an hour, which may cause some discomfort over the abdinal area, and then one should cough to expel the substance from their mouth, followed by lifting it upwards with little force until it comes out. This procedure must be performed promptly as the object might become lodged soon afterward.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Discussion about the fears regarding their dreams and their future prospects.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	The quen feat easey according to this manner, the hours upon engineers gradually introduce their small gadgets; and then approach the woman standing on her own legs, and let those beams of light shine down onto her, and position themselves around her, and complement her movements.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Gradually apply pressure to the belly of your small child and gently extract the contents that remain inside his ears, which have been prepared in a separate dish prior.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fat is not extracted properly, its weight can cause serious health issues and problems with movements of those parts; gradually the affected area begins to swell due to this accumulation.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	He began to intrude among the sheep and gradually moved towards the little lamb that was lagging behind. He then commanded the woman, who was tending them, to allow him to carry it away.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	A piece of the future hangs on one of its hinges. (Literal translation)
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If the man cannot reduce his weight through diet and exercise alone, he should consider elevating the woman's role in making healthy meal choices and engaging her more actively in the process. This can lead to a supportive environment that promotes better lifestyle habits for both individuals.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If we cannot stop them now, the hours will pass over us and wake up to their affairs with such vehemence that they promptly bring back matters which I and others have complained about through thickening sighs.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the child is born, after labor and delivery of the placenta, the mother should rest on her back while focusing on deep breathing exercisebut also observing the reduction in bleedingand comparing the baby's appearance to natural figures; then she will breastfeed the baby when possible.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The embroidery on the cloth depicts her two sons and their activities in the foreground.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife will have the care of the baby and gently turn that little one, making it easy for them.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	Cum is it called when there's an equal amount of oil and vinegar in a salad dressing, and the moments pause over its unique flavor?
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	The command instructs you to take a small object gradually and once accomplished, place it on top of a flat surface with the right side facing upwards, then tell it to lean towards your left while maintainannoing to turn around slowly; finally, make it sneeze under certain conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Death of the fetus in preparation on one side (side).
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	Many people experience occasional itching in their ears after swimming or bathing due to water trapped in the ear canal that causes irritation and discomfort. To relieve this condition, follow these steps:
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the net is hanging over your face and on a high place, hourly you must cut it in such a way that it's not retained and remains.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	E appoints the child to be baptized within three days after birth, and commands the woman to bring some garments with her. He then goes forth confidently, leaving his fate in God's hands or will.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Death of the Gemini twins, or the birth and destruction of many others.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	"I know that two dead trees remain now, and several fresh ones three or four at most; but the water is strange to them and seems to yearn away, yet they survive due to natural causes."
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	In those instances where there are multiple centers of symmetry, a second center is separated from them and distinguished by the surrounding ligament in the umbilical region of each of these. Some veins diverge so naturally as if it were an expected event, while others do so in an unnatural manner, thereby repeating their course.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	A1 - Yes, it is difficult to conceive such a child, and they often arrive at the water that has been discussed regarding unnatural figures, so you heal them as you have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	Yes, the mother's subtle and firm water that makes ease and finesse possible, along with patience, and she is skilled according to every figure as prepared by her ingenious ability for health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Memory of what is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts (miscarries).
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Mays prescribes this remedy to the disease that reads the skin and becomes longer and softer, in the form of ointment made from leaves of myrtle.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	A total assurance that she is in the field of mathematics quite far from her due appearance of aqueous character, and therefore opposed to this I come on my own accord.
Capitol .lxxvi.	The English translation for "Capitol" is the same as in Latin, which is "Capitol." In Roman numerals, this would be represented as C-VII-V (100 + 5 + 7). However, since there are no standard rules to represent words with Roman numerals beyond numeric values or dates, it'amoeba usually not necessary or applicable.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	The extraction of the fetus after it is deceased.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	You must not administer the medication to a woman who is deceased or near death, and you should not do so without consulting me if you consider that she is in good health and not at risk of harm from accidents for which she may fear losing her life.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	La mujer se recuesta suavemente contra el pecho del hombre, y la cabeza de él inclinada hacia abajo con los brazos envueltos alrededor de ella. Las formas de ellos sobresalen ligeramenete mientras permanecen en esta posición íntima.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister shall be entitled to a portion of the spoils, provided that such compensation does not exceed the value of the services rendered by him/her.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Here is the translation in English: "Now, moisten the mouth of your mother with oil, and apply the balm made from aloe, fenugreek, and fennel seeds."
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	The woman then lifted her mother's olive oil and wine skins, bringing them inside the house. She helped ease her mother into her bedroom, where she remained until dawn.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Eloc's convenient in aquo: accordingly consider if the feast is prepared enough to descend upon your head, and later you may place it into your mouth or on your palate, or behind the beard, or near the breastbone, or within other digestive areas.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	The settlements are located on the shores of Lake Lahoras, or in the meadows by the coast.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Here is the translation of the text from Catalan to English: "Have you taken leave at the first bend, and rest on its curvature in that place which lies between the said left bank, and introduce your right hand into one or more of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the objective boundary."
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	H pausa e resta nella posizione di l'altro secondo, o terzo se è necessario, in modo che rimanga equilibrato, e non si estenda più del suo retto solo.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Ans was also an important factor in the entire process, as he played a significant role just like it had been done during the eradication of him.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	To soften a piece of leather that is too stiff, you may apply some oil and gently work it into the leather with your hands. If a portion of the leather remains stiff after this treatment, you can further soften it by applying a conditioning product specifically designed for leather care. Apply the conditioner as directed on the packaging, using a clean cloth or sponge to evenly spread and massage it into the leather until it is fully absorbed. Allow the leather ample time to dry before use.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the part of the bill is written in blue, then their numbers will be changed from left to right; and so do everything else as though the whole bill was written in blue.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	The spigot is positioned lower than the other, and it cannot be adjusted due to a limitation in its design; therefore, water covers that outlet completely, and at times, it seeps through either at the joint of the pipe or on the outside of it.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	There is no need to make anything in the other hand or on both sides.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	The main duct of the gland is large or suffers from blockage during the process, or it's at the head of adjusted water, so that intervenes between the said spiny cracks and splits the head and extracts the water, or opens with an instrument which has no name "alundat", whose shape will come among other instruments in the capital which is called this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	In the apparent manner of assessment, one must judge that he is by nature a great leader, and times require him to inspire others with his actions or words as we have indicated; moreover, apart from the bones use the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	A is also the case when the soil becomes compacted or saturated with moisture in which its pores are opened up.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	It's not complicated, nor does it follow the usual rules; you can respond as soon as you are able in this case.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If you notice pus coming out of the abdomabdomen area or if it's filled with fluid, within a few hours go to that spot where the moisture is and drain it off.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	Mayes's story is about his feet on the sides of his pants, often it turns to lie and leads him towards the mouth of his mother.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Mays si esto cortado del vientre y el pie, entonces cobre que sacas ese amarillo capote que tengas envuelto sobre tu manta, y que fendas el vientre e el pie dentro de donde está escondido aquello.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	"Then if the father is absent and other members are present, she places her right hand on his shoulder; but if the mother's mouth is open, then she introduces her left index finger into her mouth, and quickly approaches the child's mouth with that finger, and inserts it as far in as possible, one or two times."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mother's mouth is affected by an abscess which affects her gums and teeth, it should not breastfeed at those times; meanwhile she ought to administer a remedy of moistened oily substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	E shall apply compresses and follow the patient with waters that soothe and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the wound is on your side, try to keep it as still and flat as possible. Then apply a sterile dressing or bandage to cover it and stop any bleeding. Make sure you seek immediate medical attention.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible to drink water, hours will pass in misery and distress, and eventually lead to death due to dehcuation.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	B) Don't leave any cause unattended regarding the second issue.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Cum tu aures completă tota operație, ai ministrat oamenilor în situațiile de apărare pentru îndeaproapele care provoacă sărăcie cu alte persoane. În acest sens, s-au folosit din special in cazurile de curație a apostemelor, care pot determina dezavantaje în viața și mii de morti dintre mai mari populacionile.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you get a cut or wound and it's bleeding heavily, apply direct pressure with a clean cloth to stop the blood flow and seek medical attention immediately for proper care.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	In English: A woman was found with a dead fetus in her womb and another one pregnant; the latter gave birth to a stillborn as well.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that the bee has had a long-standing infection on its hind legs; and it begins to swell inside the fur coat, and starts to limp.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	The physician appealed to his patient's health and treated him for a long time, but the illness was not cured.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	I speak to you today about some causes of strong attraction, and the essence of love within us, as well as our tendency to pass through periods of time without it, then find ourselves drawn back again; and I am too amazed that in the stomach there is no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Well, I could not think that they were the bones of a dead animal.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	In order to fight the plague, he extracted some bones from it and a woman existing in its molded maize, and he had been using them in such a manner for a long time, carefully placing one small piece of bread on top.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	The words you entered are not an affirmation but rather strange, instead of that in water it is science and assistance to which the doctor applies when administering medical care.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	The forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract this substance:
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Title in Catalan that refers to a grandmother: "Abú" or "Abuela" (Grandma)
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strive in which they compare to freedom; a comparison where two victors stand at both ends of two paths.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	This fine quality of wood which is more subtle than a string and whose action is either that of ebony or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	E is the latitude of each piece whose length and width are given by two lines with a statement and its margin being one line and half; and in the middle location of the two pieces their adjustments to that measure have been established, of which the length is greater than one palm and a little more, and the breadth of which is two or three inches.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	The two objects are positioned intermediately in the mouth of the mother for it to be open during those times when you rotate the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	French: Fournissez-moi une autre variante tout aussi ingénieuse et discrète que celle qui a été donnée.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	C-shaped or U-shaped, according to the design of forceps, a vaginal speculum is used for examining the female genital area.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the extreme end of his two additional fingers, their length is as much as a palm and its width is about two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	Cum you wish to reveal the truth, then carefully lift the woman above the ground while avoiding all the objects hanging around her, especially those between her legs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	"Aproveche tu herramienta, hazlo así como lo harías con unas tijeras, según la cantidad que desees evaluar dentro del ámbito materno, hasta el punto en que quieras hacerlo."
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the hallucination that they experienced was as follows.
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	En forma de pregunta, ¿cuál fue el motivo por el que se decidió la emisión del proyecto?
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of friendship that contains the title "The Great Cap" is a book.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	In English, this text can be translated as follows: "E is an instrument made of steel in the shape of tongs or pincers with a tooth on both ends, and sometimes variations are made long like forceps according to this design, so that it has teeth similarly placed as those found at the end of its predecessor."
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Paucal demonstrative (forma de amesidat) in Catalan refers to a specific type of demonstrative pronoun used to point out or highlight one or two items. In English, the equivalent would be "few" when referring to a small number but more than just 'one' or 'two', although there isn’t an exact single word that covers all uses in both languages.
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Shape of an angle with a vertex: Angle, Vertex, Points.
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of a cone with two tips: This describes an object that resembles a conical structure but has two pointed ends or "tips," which could be referring to a double-pointed cone shape.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Mode of forceps that has teeth on the grip, which allows for the baby's head to be grasped and turned: This refers to obstetric forceps with interlocking teeth or handles designed specifically for assisting in childbirth by carefully gripping and turning the baby's head during delivery.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A cone shape with two tips where the top is detached.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Two forms of Lutz jumps in figure skating are:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	Those musical instruments are exercised and when the spices of that (thing) are multiplied and prepared by the artists, it becomes more likely to succeed in their performance and hence deservingly so by the audience.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	The use of those instruments is not justified anymore because the necessity for them does not exist anymore.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Removal of the secondary spermatocyte.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	The second sigh must be retained until childbirth; for as often as thou commandest the woman who retains her womb to release it, and permit that she should sniff at something under condition, and strengthen thy hand over her mouth and nostreboxels, if by so doing is done, then thou art blameless.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	Eso sinó, tomar una oleada y perforar en la cubierta un trazo y pararse allí, respirando profundamente las erizadas de hierba cerca de su boca. Así como calmante y reductor de estrés, llene su aliento con aromas de romero, ruda, ajedrea, cilantro, semillas arabescas y cassia lineal, así como sándalo.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	These herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the wave, and let it rest on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	A) Insert the end of a straw into the mouth of the mug, and insert it through until you feel resistance from the curvature of the mug.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Well then, I suppose that's one way to put it, but as the second hand goes beyond its limit, it has a certain velocity.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Mays, if you are still in labor and not ready to give birth yet, then command the midwife to gently rub olive oil or almond oil on your left hand, and then place it inside a container of warm water. Then, she should take that into her hands and search for the second child (after finding and repositioning the first one), and when she has found the second child, she shall slowly pull them out little by little in line with proper technique so that you do not experience strong contractions during this process.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Cove that the change is as easy left and right, making it more accessible.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Certainnly! Here is the translation of your text in English: "Bearing in mind that the amount of attraction will be adjusted accordingly to ensure compliance and avoid attachment."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother's mouth is obstructed, we have repeated the administration of medication and medical care for her sore throat using herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	Mays if you are not completely healed from all the causes we have recommended, guard it well that you do not overdo it in the process of abstraction, but rather ensure that what is written to you comes to the mouth of your mother quickly so she can take action on behebfemme. Furthermore, strictly adhere to this four-part remedy; for if followed correctly, this will surely lead to her being healed within a fortnight and completely dissolved and cured.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	Mays quan se poyreys is of high degree discomfort to the head and stomach, and causes nausea in the sick person; therefore it should be administered with smoke therapy and appropriate remedies for water retention.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Old Harvest Ale is a traditional beer with subtle hops and dried nettles, figs, and aged oak flavors.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of instrument under which the woman is suspected to have menstrual retention and secondary bleeding is a pelvic ultrasound.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	The sky is blue or it's not raining.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	Article E shall stipulate the precise temperature of a thin section and the wide section over the flame, as well as the slight smoldering above the wick'angs.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	You can have the portion that is being smoked and another one as well.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Pediatric urethral catheterization without perforation.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	As a child, Moses showed signs of great wisdom and power; he could even speak eloquently from an early age.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Don't approach the lady and pierce that specific vein there; instead, puncture the one on her upper thigh, but be careful not to touch the bone.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	A prophecy hangs over the one who carries the flame, and the prophecy protects that man in whom it is believed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	May feels scared that he might be getting too tired, so during work breaks, he uses a tube for days on end, and the child will eventually recover.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	Healing rashes and ulcers in the genital area require proper care to prevent scarring; therefore it is important that healing occurs without complications, using the suggested water solutions for cleansing and dressing as mentioned in the treatment instructions.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Treatment of the fistula that resulted from your previous surgery.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that originate in the remnants of the pancreas or the groove and result in a low output of pus are known as pancreatic fistulas.
E es una fistula o motas.	E is a tube or hose.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	The roof is quite old and exposed to the damp white moisture or subtle corrosion, with some traces of these leaks visible on certain areas.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	"The ones from those places are highly skilled at obtaining that which comes out of them through excretion and ventilation; some even experience the discomfort due to excretion, and very often they expel vermin."
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	So those kinds of fistulas that arise between the bladder and skin, or within the vaginal tissues; as well as those occurring at the junction of the labia majora and near the natal cleft (crack).
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	A penetrating anal fistula is one in which the opening is located inside the anus and a non-penetrating fistula, where your finger should be gently inserted into the rectum and carefully guided to enter the fistula when it becomes tortuous.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	In that case it's a trickery, hours interfering in that subtle plan of either lead or horsehair you feel the temptation or touch on your tongue.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not experience any signs of constipation or diarrhea or bloating, then as we have said, hours pass and be aware that it is not penetrating, and hours later it affects the inflammations.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladam or near to the base of the gland, its significance is that it causes urine leakage from that and prevents further medical treatment at that location.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Mays if it is penetrating into the knee joint or into the bone and causing severe pain in the area of distribution, hours without relief signifies that it may be a pervasive entry here; and if not associated with stiffness in the knee, as well as continuous pain in the affected limb's circulation; and such cases do not benefit from this medication nor is the condition consolidated yet.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all cases where such a perforation occurs that cannot be healed on its own, and the treatment of which requires surgical intervention by skilled surgeamoes upon whom you rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not outdated and healthy, I hope to follow your advice, as well as what I have already experienced.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	Here is the translation of your text from Old Catalan to English:
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If someone is feeling unwell near your mouth, now cover your own words with your mouth. (This could be interpreted as a suggestion to speak less or not say anything potentially offensive when others are ill.)
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you sit in your chair and let it fall apart to expose the structure within, other than feeling between your chair and that framework or wood, after some time you will certainly feel that there is something penetrating; and then do not work with that, because it is not safe, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some dogs that are healthy in their own home can become ill when they visit other homes.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	E of the medication for which one hopes healing is that you ignite (cauterize) subtilly according to the depth of the fistula, as it has been previously described, and insert that ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the edge; then iterate applying three or more times so that all those flesh parts seemingly resembling a plume's feather appear well-healed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	It is essential to ensure that all wounds are properly wrapped with a sterile bandage in order to prevent any further contamination and to allow the body'amo medicines to heal and strengthen the tissues; if it does, you will be well; otherwise, at no time can they be healed by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	The text appears to be a description of an unspecified procedure or technique involving insertion and removal within the human body, possibly related to medical treatment for conditions such as fistulae. However, due to several errors in grammar, spelling, and coherence, it's challenging to fully understand its meaning without further context. In English:
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	A proposed modification for those festering wounds with tubes inserted using a catheter and not caused by rubbing from the rug requires immediate attention in order to prevent further complications or infection. The following steps may be taken to address this issue:
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Mays flux of blood occurs when it passes between your artery and vein during those moments when you are injecting that fat into the wound using either a heated instrument or an acute medicine, for cauterizing with heat requires proper tools: thus, it is adjusted to those vessels properly, and absorbed from those dried up humidities.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	A proper care of those galls wrapped in the bud or shoot within which lies the grain before it branches out, and at appropriate hours, the rainfall ensures that these hard encased seeds grow and mature.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	In terms of medicine, those with antiseptic and healing properties are restored at the times when they help to cure and do not cause re-infection.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If you have a rectal or anal fistula that extends into the previous lumen of your bowel and is elongated from the surface of your skin, it may sometimes enter your anus and cause pain.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	If both of you are strongly tempted to commit adultery or have sex with someone else, the relationship becomes unfaithful right away, now it doesn't work anymore based on trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The purpose of this treatment is to follow one of three methods: (1) cauterize the wound as we have previously described; or (cuerex) that it heals within as much time as possible for you to be able to reintroduce the usual and proper care, without causing a secession from which blood could flow into the limb, nor should you proceed with the operation if there is a risk of damaging the contents in the cavity, and that an event occurs over the wound leading to your intent; or (3) elongate the tube and cleanse out any pus within it through which you have made the incision as described earlier, or amputating by means of sharp instruments, and purify any fistulous flesh in the area where you can penetrate with a probe. Then strive to restore all the rest of the wound after cauterization if pus does not solidify and rupture the open fistula on the backside of the buttock, and make it heal more quickly by means of proper care.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	A fistulas can be closed following this method: when you introduce the suture into the fistula, and around the skin surface near the tail of the anus, as well as along the margin of the butt, hours before attempting to perforate its extremity, using a preparatory needle similar to those for coils in the following manner.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And the faithful ones are surrounded by his fields and environment, while he attempts to enclose the true believe within the loop that leads to salvation.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Mays gently inserts the margin of the needle into your anus, gradually pushing it deeper until you feel it is securely in place. Then carefully remove the tip of the needle and adjust each end so that they are equidistant from one another. Hold them apart for a day or two to allow the tissues between the punctured areas to heal. When the needle feels comfortable, proceed with your intended use, ensuring it's done in a clean environment.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	A proper care should be taken until the plague is fully eradicated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, wait until it does so in some way, manner, or form as you see fit to your preparation, but do not insert anything into the puncture without your knowledge, lest you cause harm; rather, apply warmth to that area where healing occurs.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatulum (spatula) used to treat a fistula: the curvature that is too acute and the other part being not-acute, so as to prevent it from entering where it's not necessary, thus ensnaring the problem area effectively.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	The thread of a needle in which the yarn runs through during sewing.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Morroids are found in two varinities; one is white like carbon dust and the other resembles butter with a greasy appearance.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	A of those little and big ones, and that their skin turns during seasons into one, and most are, and outside the collar, and at the ends of them.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that have been little wet according to the month, of which clear water flows or a small stream of blood red is constantly flowing, and it follows the color of the soil.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	The healing of that which is within the body is for you to command the evil to heat and come out into the vessel, so that it may be scraped away, and the morbid growths appear before thee.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	And you take off your shoes and place them undernecu that which I have there on my shelf, and then put yours on the left side of it.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Mays les uncis ne so tengutz en aqueles per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aqueles, lahoras pren aqueles am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelues am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelues e polveriza sobre lor alcunes polveres caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aqueles en loc de cauteri; o cauteritza aqueles segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	A) He that is sick, let him first be healed of those things in which he is sick, and then the other diseases will be cured within it.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the foot does not obey exiting movements, hours of cramp can occur as the cause may be a tight calf muscle or an issue with the fluid in the leg that obeys loosely when the pain is being pressed upon. This discomfort could also stem from problems such as poor circulation or nerve compression within the lower extremities, which would require further medical evaluation to diagnose accurnately and treat appropriately.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	In English: Mays recommends washing the hemorrhoids with water from a sponge or cloth soaked in lukeward water (luke-warm water). He suggests that this practice may help allee, but he also warns against using your own grease or oil to insert into them as it could worsen their condition. Instead, try keeping the area clean and dry until they have healed on their own. Please note: This is not medical advice; if you are experiencing discomfort from hemorrhoids, consult a healthcare provider for appropriate treatment options.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	One who performs this incision, cover the wound with swab and use forceps to expose it according to this manner: hold firmly covered and insert that into needle, then permeate through lesions at its locations on top of it, and wrap both extramittents of the firm around the other part's location underneath the needle, lengthwise; and stretch the wound stricture firmly, and place the firmer and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	In English: "Every believer in God must fast completely; he should abstain from all food and drink, except for one day of those days when the overabundance of wine flows."
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Upon the hill where roses are blooming, and near the chirping of a bird; there rests he who commands the malice that surrounds him.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	A propersse of that box within which those herbs are kept and how much they should be used to heal the sick or for other cures as appropriate.
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Misplaced trees may suffer due to severe root damage or natural strangulation.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	E cum so antiquadas et in aquell medicina, l'horas coves que tu rasas aquells am la puncta de spuma o am la tua ungla intra qu'sian faites humides e hora hostades de aquelles les esporgis, la qual prohibeix aquells dins consolidacio; i aprop cura aquells intra qu'sian consolidats.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The healing of wounds is often much more rapid than the initial injury occurred, and even more so when those wounds are cared for diligently.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The care of Almássera is indeed essential.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that the almond tree is of great virtue and it indeed has a red heart according to its color which resembles clover leaves on top; it's made throughout the entire body and especially in the lower parts, near the roots and branches. And beware lest you feel pain from eating them, as they can cause discomfort to your stomach.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then so that the water which flows into the circuit of the nail is held by the pincers or with an awl and removed from its rust; and proceed accordingly.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you cut it off, cauterize the second one which follows in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Mayfly (also known as shadfly or fishfly) is a small slender hairy round insect that appears on the surface of water bodies in many children'hemoliasis veins.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The essence of Lu's teachings is to extend and expand your inner self or the aspect that you trust within yourself. This means embracing all parts of oneself with love, compassion, and understanding. It involves letting go of judgments and limitations, allowing for personal growth, authenticity, and a deeper connection to life's purpose.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If it boils over, apply heat or use a hot compress as previously advised, either through fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	I have been erased both reversed and non-reversed by the instrument which I control.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Mays' ant is a small and thick feathered or furred bump on the surface of his body, and when he strokes it gently, it seems like an annoying sensation similar to that caused by ants. It is made around the area.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The cure for lungworms is to take a goose quill or turkey feather and make it strong by soaking in the blood of a live animal; then place that over the mucus within which you will insert the feather through the openings on its sides, and gently rotate the tube inside while inserting until it reaches the edge of the lung. Then remove the parasite from your pet's body using this method.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you want to make a choice between iron or staincu according to this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The strap of the earring was made with subtlety and care, not pierced but fitted over the earlobe, dangling above it like a whispered secret.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you burn the ant as soon as it appears in the burning process of aethyl on the capital of Cauteria.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The instruments that you administer in order to provide assistance.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some vegetables are made of Argent or Latte or Eream fondue or mallows; and some vegetables are made from those instruments small and large according to the ones you administer them, because whoever is administerired in the cure of the little children has a small instrument; and from those whose sticks are flexible or pliable, their crispers are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The Cristero War, also known as the Cristiada or "the Dress Rehearsal" in English, was a widespread conflict between Mexican Catholics and secularist, anti-Catholic, government forces that took place from 1926 to 1929. The name 'Cristeros' refers to the rebels who fought against the government, with "gran" meaning great or large, indicating a significant impact on Mexican society at the time. In Catalonian language, one might say: "La Guerra de Cristinos, també coneguda com la Cristiada o 'l'ensayo d'vestir', va ser un conflicte ample entre els catolics mexicans i les forces gubernamentals anti-catolicistes, que es disputaren des del 1ebelí a l'any 1926 al 1929. El nom de 'Cristinos' fa referència als rebels que es batian contra el govern, on "gran" significa gran o molt, indicant una millor impacte en la societat mexicana a la seva veu."
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the dial is lowered less than this guideline shows; and it's further away from the bag as indicated below so many times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The extreme end of the last one mentioned earlier, which is inserted into the anus and lies behind subtlety; and in one side of its tail there are two hooks, and on the other side a single hook, and it's as big as the hook according to the thickness and length of the rays and quite small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	C is a bag in which the urine of an animal (either from a beast or sheep) is stored, and its capacity is one pail.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	C shall be pierced at multiple points, and then rotated; and the space between these points should be relatively large.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	The substance entwined in those threads far from the true faith shall be enclosed in a bag; and when it is hung on a hook, tighten it with two strong cords around its head between the temples, so that each person can attach to it. The quality of this cristern is such that you must immerse the medicine contained within the bag according to the amount tolerated by the illness; and make sure it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	In the event of an unfortunate accident, place yourself supine with your legs raised and arms outstretched to one side, allowing someone else to carefully lay you on a suitable surface; gently rub some oil or ointment onto the affected area. Afterward, have the caregiver apply pressure at specific points for relief. Carefully remove the bandage, ensuring that blood is not excessively released all at once; then, after removing the dressing from the wound, reposition your limbs to a comfortable position and ensure proper healing.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine induces sleep, take as much rest as possible; and if you sleep all night through, it will be even more beneficial for recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	In the event that you suffer from abdome distress and diarrhoea or vomiting of blood, seek medical attention immediately to undergo necessary treatments for your condition.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If one suffers from hemorrhoids or piles, the symptoms may include mild to severe pain and discomfort in the anal region. Hemorrhoids can be internal (inside the rectum) or external (around the anus), and they often involve swoln blood vessels that cause itching, burning sensations, or even bleeding during bowel movements. It's essential to consult a healthcare provider for proper diagnosis and treatment options tailored to your specific condition.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Treatment of Plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	In the division of the treatment for water-related diseases that is suitable for free use, I hereby declare the following treatments and medicines according to the prescription:
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	I suppose that the types of pearls are diverse depending on when they are formed and according to the conditions under which they are created.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	The reasons why wounds can be so painful are akin to the feeling of hitting a rock, or incision with a knife, or percussion from being struck, or by a club, or by a sword, or similar causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	In my body, I carry scars just like a scar that falls upon the skin such as on the head, neck, chest, abd [abdominal] region, or limbs and similarities to those of the body's members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	Yes, I can recommend treatments for various diseases and provide you with some thought processes and guidelines to follow in relation to other ailments as well. Here is an overview of common treatment options and considerations for several conditions:
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	Starting from the first chapter, I will address the simple themes before moving on to discussing complex ideas in line with the third chapter during our discussion.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	When you encounter a simple cut on the head that is not a fracture, consider the following: if it's a minor scratch or tear, and there has been slight bleeding only, with no signs of infection such as redness or swelling; then cleanse your wound gently without delay. If necessary based on the amount of blood loss from the injury (and provided that there are no other reasons preventing you from doing so), extract any foreign object and perform a minor surgical procedure, especially if the bleeding is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	E shall be the examination of the opposing party's statement; and pay attention to any maladies related to repletion (overeating) and heavy meals, as well as travel-related illnesses.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	The following is the translation of the given text from Occitan to English:
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	During the rainy season, if you come into contact with contaminated water or soil containing Staphyloccu aureus bacteria, there is a risk of developing an infected wound in your skin that becomes red and swollen, or an infection from ingesting it.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Mays is sure that it's an ant bite, just hours after being on the beach, if his wound and air have not changed since I recommended you to wear this powder in small amounts.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	AIRJA has changed that time, the hours of rest upon his wounds in order to be healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	Whether May's plague is great or it's poor in space and appearance, if his lips are not fitted with pearls, then I shall adjust those teeth accordingly as per my recommendation for the alignment of their row.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Maya's remedy for the plague is discovered in herbs and plants found near water; these are carefully prepared with medicinal oils and restoratives to strengthen the body. She instructs that the afflicted should be fed nourishing food, rich in vitamamoins and minerals, which resemble common fruits but are infused with healing properties.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If the leg is rotten and does not stick to the bone, then you should cut all around it as soon as possible and take that piece away, and be careful with this part.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	In these cases where the flow of blood may occur from an artery or vein that has not been separated by medicines, first inquire if it is an artery and if you find one that is unclotted, then incise near that spot or tie off that area; and if there is a necessity for what we have said to not work, cauterize within where the blood has clotted.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these wounds are simple and small, the cause of them is negligible; therefore you should cover those with this powder, because as it hardens over time that air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The recipe for the polvera is as follows: a) Olive oil from pressed olives - one part; b) Dragon's blood resin - two parts (it must not be extinct); c) Cochineal insect dye - three parts; all ingredients should be thoroughly crushed and sieved. Once the mixture is well blended, it should be poured into a container with an adhesive seal, and left to coagulate at room temperature.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	The strict prescriptions of that doctor prevented me from taking a nap and resting, and I didn't protest because it was so necessary that my health be restored through proper medical treatment.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Any weapon made of iron or steel cuts water alone when you are not holding it in your current hands and without the touch of fire.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	The storm caused significant damage to the large estuaries where it had settled and narrowed passages, but fortunately has not yet affected those areas that were recently dredged, whose banks remain unchanged.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air changes, especially during summer times, this does not affect the position of this powder, but then you should apply those ointments we have mentioned earlier, or pause over those linen poultices dipped in wheat flour and water with honey mixed in; also apply those other remedebut if they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	May be you broke your foot during the fight and it's small, hours later I will come to get you there.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	You should be careful with treating the skull fractures in that case because it is a serious condition.
De las plaguas del col.	Plagues of the locusts.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	The plague does not progress in the colon when hours are not different in medication, and between the disease of the head that is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	The branch of the brachial plexus is dissected or arterial; however, if it's a nerve, then it should not be an endangered site but rather avoided to prevent sharp pain that may cause intense stinging sensation, similar to vinegar and such feelings as there are no numbness with the nerves and contraction of that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	The nerve (E) does not hesitate over the rain any cause of total freedom (tot freja), for the substance of the nerves is free and its continuation lies in the brain, which is the most vital of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	The ancient remedy of healing waters is composed in a specific manner: water mixed with curative herbs (plants), as well as diluted water and infused oils, both refined or unrefined. Following this method, apply the resulting mixture to stones or minerals according to these guidelines, using medicinal creams if necessary.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, he spends hours stitching it up or narrows its lips, and then carefully cleans that area to be healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	At high tide or low tide, the clay seabed is either deep or shallow, depending on where it's located. Mudflats are periodically pierced by that in the lower part of the mudflat area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	When a vein on the beach is injured and blood flows out, it can be separated or tied off if necessary to stop the bleeding. In some cases, it may need to be cauterized if needed.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	Mays si ja ha inscrit las pectoralas del golayro o tot, i so salvades les venes del coll; l'hora tu ajusta les barbes de la coda am sutura sobre la cana del golayiro e no toques aquell. Abans egala aquell i reduxeys aquel sobre sa figura natural, i apuixe aquell amb estricatura decente, i lliessá aquela per alts jorns; i apuixe cura aquel am entreniment en els quals es situa la stipticitat i l'excitació que sia sana.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague has occurred in your land and you have not made provision for it, then you shall purify that place; and if there are fragments of human bones found among those things which belong to them, all these should be removed completely; whatever is unclean, let it remain until the plague subsides, and then separate and remove the dirt from it.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	Is the plaque that you recommend recently covered by a layer of dust?
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	Mays, if you are caught in the net of fate with a fishing line, remember that time when it was as clear as water and will come back to your mind at your desk.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From the scratches of a hill or resembling what is made between the shoulders and its formation as a plow, cartwheel, launcher or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If you hear thunder or lightning flashes and want to know the distance, count the seconds between the two events - that will give you an approximation of how far away it is. Take note also if there are heavy rains accompanied by strong winds when the storm arrivebecause this could be a sign of severe weather; then realize that the storm can be dangerous.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If you are feeling sadness and the sorrow is recent, pause in your first hour of sleep for a while, and don't hold on to that which is not retained deep within you and returns to the heart, but rest in something attractive, and release those two shadows from the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the ointment is not at your disposer, take frequent breaks in the orifice of the storm cave until enough water collects so you can suck it out; and make the illness sleep over the water so that the fluid runs off where it has accumulated.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	After three days from the day of the seizure or more, if there is no occurrence of bad spasm, severe tremor or stricture, and at other times you feel good, then know that the illness has passed; therefore, treat that person with appropriate care until they are fully healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If May's sanction is waived and she has all the time needed, then proceed with what was already done (the fistula), and cure it accordingly by her authority.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the wound is a sharp incision or puncture and it's superficial on the surface of the skin or bone, then after some hours cures that with water (if large) or powder (if small).
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	May had buried the treasure in the ocean and he no longer knew its precise location, then she took a long time to track down that wave and tried to extract those pieces, if separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	"Unless they are separated by hours, the tide will rise and wash away all attempts to extract it."
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	A of the other injuries in the other members, healing by juice is the use of saline solution that we have mentioned earlier.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From the stings of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort in the stomach can be severe or mild or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	There are many large veins and nerves in the dura mater or meningeal layer, which is responsible for causing intense and subtle intrusion into them and their seams being so powerful.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disturbance can be easily resolved through another method, and the reduction of their influence is even easier, provided you don't interfere with their place at any moment; for they are covered and become thickened so that the entry of light becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best way to cause disturbance is migration, as it's not difficult for shrubs in that case; thus, it is also not easy for those two species mentioned earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	The abdominal wall consists of four main layers or fasciae, and the other sutures are common to those in sutures of other plaques of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	The two other sutures connect to the other bones, but only their own in the sagittal suture of the abdinal region.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	Recomiéndame todos aquellos que asisten esta exposición y declaro, en primer lugar, su total compromiso con la preservación de nuestro medio ambiente. En segundo lugar, me gustaría instar a cada uno de los presentes a tomar medidas para reducir su huella ecológica y contribuir al cuidado del planeta que compartimos.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	When the rain is light and there's a reason for that on the ground due to wind conditions, it can be difficult to reduce such conditions. At times like this, there are two main reasons: either because of the small scale of disruption as we have said before, or when the soil becomes deflated inflation by the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	So let me know if you'd like to know as well, at this time I will tell you how to wash your hair using a soap bar in water by yourself or while having shampooed hair, and adding cypress, spices, and embrocations so that the balm becomes resolved within that wrapped bag.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some vinegars contain substances that make them effective for use in treating inflammeration, and are more beneficial than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Therefore, it is crucial to address this issue promptly, as your skin may absorb the harmful chemicals present in water that tastes excessively salty or has a malodorous smell due to pollution from various sources.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	May be excused for entering this message without introducing himself first; however, as time passes and the interruption becomes smaller, a little device I possess with embedded earphcks will become handy.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first curative measure is better when it is owned that it does not dry up, and cannot be occupied to dry out by necessity or need.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	This phrase in English translates to "Dal segno, repeat from the sign." It is an instruction commonly found in sheet music for orchestral and ensemble pieces. The term "dal" means "from," while "segnó" refers to the musical symbol indicating a place where the piece should be repeated.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	A batch of acute triangles and a batch of non-acute triangles; the extremity is subtle, and it's not the subtlenaturally of space but rather slightly obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	Therefore, the plant growth is accelerated and yields are increased from the soil, but it's crucial that its reduction follows the pattern of its natural form, in its own proper location, if possible on water, as this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	Mays quand il y a une disruption large, elle est dans la partie inférieure du ventre ; cela peut vous donner mal au dos et faire vaciller vos jambes plus haut ou bas qu'avant ; si c'est dans la partie supérieure gauche de l'abdomen, alors cela pourrait causer des doulecks à votre tête et aux parties adjacentes.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	If the disturbance is in one of the two parts of the body, then pause your understanding and consideration for some time so that you can ensure that the affected area is more or less than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	I urge you to address this matter in both the great and minor plains.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	"In minor wounds, apply water and prepare the appropriate ointment; let it be applied by someone you trust, who will hold the entire disruption of its edges together and align the lips so that they are closed over the one who sewed up any incision."
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture technique: one that takes the needle and makes a stitch according to the width of the gap; and place the needle at a distance from the edge of the disrupted ring, and strengthen the needle once on each side without inserting it fully into the ends of the tendon, both at which you left the sutured part of the tendon during detachment, until that stitch penetrates to that part; and then you have attached two ends of the tendon and two ends of the ring, thus complecuated four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Strengthen the base of the needle's circuit, and some parts of its spine extend, adding both lips and a patch for reinforcement; then reduce the thickness of the said wire and insert another needle in it, so that it is as stiff as the first one. Continue doing this if necessary with the wires needed to complete the entire length of the thread.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The needles glide between grace and subtlecuhte, the subtler ones slightly pierce the skin; and the thicker ones are difficult to insert into the vein, so be careful that they are balanced in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	In the cove where the needle is fixed at both ends of the rope, ensuring that the flesh is not pierced injudiciously and that the sail unfurls ahead of its hoisting.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	C - The use of non-absorbable suture materials should not be permitted in cases where the wound is expected to heal without primary intention.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	A. Apply ice packs on the ends of the needles so that they do not lead to bad inflammation; and place them over the expanded pulvinar sacs, which hold the ends of the neednels; and leave those in until you sense that the swelling has subsided.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	As for these types of stitches with needles in a round manner, it is most suitable for small wounds and up to the point where there are one or two or around that number during suturing.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Mays' second suture is called "communal" because you are to mend the four ends of a rope using a needle in one go, with a thread that is wrapped evenly and subtly thick and thin.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	How much will the needle have penetrated these four extremities by reducing the needle from that starting point on which you began, causing the thread to retract in the lower part of its course, so that the suture is according to a previous suture with which the threads are knotted.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Pause between each stitch, there is a considerable amount of the mentioned material.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	Here's a useful tip for all the men out there.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	In a case of an accident in which a man's intestines were severely injured, with the largest part being torn off by a cotton ball and disrupted around two palms of the organ's surrounding bud layer as well as affected the limb itself; then I reattached the section that had been detached for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The storm has been settled in the area for about fifteen days or so, and afterwards that and he was sick but now is healthy; and again after this event there were floods almost every year, and it became part of its surroundangs.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	The other healers had claimed that it would not be possible to cure; and by a miracle, I found the ointment there which was in the place where no remedy nor any medicine had been attempted, but merely poultices over the swelling for two days. Then with assiduous use of cold water as an emulsion, it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	According to the paragraph, there are two types of surgical suture materials mentioned: synthetic and natural.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	Begin stitching the wound by inserting the needle through one edge of the incision to the other side.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	So, the needle is inserted into the ear canal and then moved along its length according to its entirety; while doing so, let the tip of the instrument that you have inserted the needle in remains within. Then make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from the exit hole towards the entrance hole on the opposite extreme of the instrument.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	E cut through that piece and make it penetrate, hours you let that piece penetrate or another one in the extreme end of the thread at the exit door to the entrance door; and leave the other extremity of the peg that is on this level, and make the needle penetrate into the other end of the entry door to the exit door.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	The fish hook pierces into the water, where you insert it to catch a fish. It goes through the eyelet at the tip of the line, which is located near the end that remains outside while the entire baited setup enters the water.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Begin by approaching the edges of this wound and touch that side along with your finger, until you reach the tip which is on the other edge, and extend the needle through it into the vein; then thread that through the vein to where it enters, ensuring it's still in the vein.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	In both cases you have one quarter of water and another, then you add one more quarter of water to the other quarter within that total amount as per this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this suturing method is that you use a linen thread with which you stitch the skin, so that on each pass you pull it through one-third of the length of the limb segment, and then let the other two-thirds go in to complete the knot.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second proper suture technique which involves the use of Galea thread is that where you cut along that secondary lining and then stitch it up again; so all parts are joined to its corresponding part in line with nature; and they apply one end of the string on one side and the other end at the opposite extreme, as I have explained before.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Keep the needle at the end of your sightline towards your own starting point, and make it pierce the endpoint inward with that same line. Then turn the neede and let it pierce from out to in on two different points along the edge.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	C turns around those corners and seeks to penetrate some of the departing ones into the foreground within two extremities of the view or others that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This type of stitching is better than the common loose line, and it's a kind that I remember having used before.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Wallace.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	On the following days (or at nightfall) after surgery, when the wound is closed with two needles and it seems like you are interfering in this matter, do not insert a foreign object into the incision through which your sutures run. Do not allow anything to penetrate between these layers as per those that hold together the heart's chambebody.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	The repair of the umbilical cord is more difficult than that of other abdomnent sites because it has a greater degree of contamination.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The juice of the medicinal dragon fruit is considered a standard for other fruits.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason it is done in this way is because when you acquire the recent plague at your sanctuebody before that altered air reaches it, and reduce its bulk as well as cooking it properly, eventually the paste turns a reddish-brown color.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	The air has indeed changed the fate of this plague, as time passes over that high mount where you have been present, which form rocks and carve fields, being strengthened and observed; and just like in these cases where it is cured, other plagues within have also been healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you are not currently taking any medications and your illness is mild, start with a course of rest, plenty of fluids, and change wet clothes twice daily to stay warm as well. You can do this the same way I have instructed before until you get better, so that you don't need other medical interventamoins when infections are simple and straightforward.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	I'm afraid that the plague may spread to the principal members of society, causing them to immerse themselves in a sea of despair and torment, or wreak havoc through these channels between the highs and lows of humanity, leaving nothing but ashes.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If he feels pain or decay in his veins because of this ongoing struggle, then that man who once was a stiff black figure to me, now mostly if the swelling reaches the vessel and becomes an exiting piercing through the cavity'cups into.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	The blood that is in the gross vessels is healthier than the blood that is in the fine vessels.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	E is difficult to cure the swelling called "hydrocele", as it does not respond well to traditional therapy and tends to recur; this is due to the large number of veins present in it, its considerable size, and the intricate nature of its contents. Additionally, its proximity to nerve tissues adds to the complexity of treatment.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	The best fabric to use for a garment is the one that meets your requirements and feels freshly washed; then adjust it according to your taste by reducing the sleeves accordingly.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Mays, now you have crossed boundaries and made things black, the hours when you tighten that faithful grip on the place that is dishonored by you, for it to bring forth streams of blood, as veins and artereby are depicted in fabric.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	In relation to the water that is another flaw, and a pause of two extremities of the suspended part of the departure left behind after the storm has passed over you, so that on your side it gets attached to its wave deck, you must build the walling of the cloth and emission of the bridge of the wave.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Recall of the Plagues that happened in Bethlehem.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	Acute pancreatitis is a sudden inflammader of the pancreas that can occur due to trauma from an impacting force such as a blow to the abdomen. In severe cases, it may be possible for the organ to recover in certain patients with appropriate treatment and care. The pain associated with this condition often originates from old injuries or scars on the right side of the stomach caused by past episodes of pancreatitis that have led to the formation of a fistula (an abnormal connection between two organs).
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	In the case of a wound that was not healed by conventional means, but instead has been treated with subtle methods which promote healing and have solidified in place, we shall proceed accordingly to ensure proper care.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	You must also ensure that the place you have rented is consolidated and safe from potential hazards; do not let any accidents occur in your property due to neglect or poor maintenance; avoid causing harm to others through your actions, negligence, or intentional misconduct. Additionally, be sure to properly maintain all fixtures and appliances on the premises, and refrain from conduct that is disruptive or dangerous to other tenants in the building.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	I also mentioned various experiments experienced when a frog is in the bucket, and it's small enough to be tied according to this method; you take big frogs, adjust their mouths with your hands so that one of them has its mouth open against the other's lips; then as they clamp onto eachnother, you tighten your grip on their heads, and because it adheres and doesn't dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Ants and water have a symbiotic relationship when it comes to survival, as the presence of ants can help facilitate water access for both themselves and other organisms in their environment. In return, the availerenal resources provided by these other organisms, including water sources like plants or small pools, support the ant population growth and overall health.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Article IV. The Parties shall make every effort to reduce air pollution and prevent the accumulation of hazardamoins in their territories, as well as excessive noise in residential areas that may cause harm or annoyance; and ensure no detrimental impact on human health or the environment.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It may be possible that the butterfly is observed beneath a very thin leaf which is made of animal skin attached to it and resembles a needle; therefore you take the tip of those filaments from the leaf, having it skinned off, and then attach its tip with the same filament in needles and wrap this around that leaf, finally securing it at the tear.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	Indeed, this spiral of threading is but a second path of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	The storm is large and extensive, mostly if it occurs in one of the subtropical areas, where hours are not mild but subtle, and it's a healing force rather than harmful.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Treatment of ulcer and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	When all the plague and epidemics raged on and spread throughout Antiquity, causing ulcers that do not heal quickly and stay swolamoined for a long time in any member of the body universally, this condition is called "fistula" by us.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	According to the truth, an ulcer is a fistula that is covered with thick skin, hard, white and painless like a hollow of bone; hence it'n called induration or ulceration, i.e., penal penalty without stinging sensation.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	"E" is in a moist environment at home with high humidity levels, but the humidity quickly decreases within certain hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some of this moisture becomes mist, and it is scarce, thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	In the division of this subject, we shall discuss the plagues which are not healed by nature nor do they consist only of flesh wounds but rather for one or several causes: One such cause is that there may be insu#sufficient blood in the body; another due to the malice of the individual; or because between the wound and the lips, the skin is hard, preventing regeneration of the tissue; or it might be caused by foreign matter. The ulcer itself absorbs the material that lies on top of it if its quality is poor; or the medicinal treatment may be unsuitable for curing the wound; or because there's an infection causing pestilence; or due to the region having specific properties, like near Saragossa where digestion and healing are difficult. Additionally, this might also be caused by a lack of one or more bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Ja, presenterò le cause di quelle malattie, gli sintomi di esse e il loro trattamento attraverso le medicine nella suddivisione.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Ecce, eis ca vos podés aprendre sobre la curació d'una fístula que es causada per una operació mai gran.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	In English: All types of fistulas that affect all the members of the body include those that reach large veins and arteries, or to nerves, bladder, abdome, or to any ribs, or to one of the vertebrae of the spine, or to any of the composite joints formed by a composition similar to that of the hip and shoulder. And from those that are close to the main limb and resemble them.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Here is the translation of your text from Old Catalan to English: "So it's about these types of fistulas according to this model are diseases with difficult healing and no cure, and they take up that effort and ignorance."
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	There are no exceptions to the depth at which these locations should be explored and diagnosed for a fistula, as well as attempted repair if necessary; one must always seek out knowledge of its cause, whether it is due to erosion or iron, and pursue that path.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If you suspect that your bracelet has a twisted clasp, try the following method to straighten it out:
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	The text you've provided appears to be in Catalan and it seems to contain errors or nonsensical phrases. If we try to translate the clear parts into English, "Si la fistula est havent motz horrificis" can loosely mean "If the fistula is having horrible things". However, without a clearer context, providing an accurate translation and interpretation of this sentence would be difficult.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	The Cricotritic Zones are the areas in which one experiences soreness and pain due to the moisture from other sore spots that flows towards them. In English, these can also be referred to as "referral zones" or simply "sore spots."
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	With great curiosity and according to the method you are able to know if this is a distant or proximal fistula, it's either a fistula with several openings and located everywhere in the totality of your strength, with the fear you feel towards it; or the cause of its malady that requires your compression on the spot. Also, there are appearances related to significations and accidental causes for abscesses.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	You have thought about all those causes of vertigo that I mentioned before; the hours go by until the treatment according to confidence sets in: and it is that you consider whether these are apparent fistulas, close or distant from the joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the places which I have told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Lahor's dried-up fistula as mentioned in Luke, and he was cured of the water that is filtered through that rocky region and of corrupted flesh, or of leprosy, or of similar afflictions. The one within him that was diseased had been healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	Mays if the fistula is of great depth and straightness, then hours must be counted when it can be cut near to your side as much as possible, and all its corrupted flesh should be removed; and acutely applied medicines may be inserted into that within the cavity of the fistamo, which you have understood with an iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	An alkaline water can cure some types of infections that cause acidity, as it neutralizes all the acid that is present within the cavity of a fistula caused by corrosion.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	B: This herb has the ability to restore that which was lost, generating healthy flesh within he who is being healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If Mays is not healed by now, the wound should be cauterized as soon as it's reopened again.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	The translation of the provided text from Catalan to English is as follows:
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Mays si l'os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcun que la corruputziono esti negra, li horas tue rai qui quella correption esset totam; et apur curet aquel am aucun quel entro chi sia sanat.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healthy and balanced, the body won't be able to function properly; therefore you should realize that you have not completely achieved the eradication of corruption. Then, in turn, carefully and meticulously work on your reasoning and enlightenment, so as to ultimately restore its former strength and vitality.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	If it is true, then you are right; if not, learn that this corruption lies in the depths far from the heart, which has not yet reached, and therefore there is nothing to fear about it for now.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the corrupted bone is small or can be reached, now use fine forceps as needed to gently remove it from that spot.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If you have any doubts or concerns, the careful extraction of all information may weaken your strength in some way without a valid reason for your support.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	May's is distressed by any cause of dampness, and in his ignorance he has neither fear nor guilt; hencefornights he exhumes those remains or bones if they are here, and frees the skulls.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared for the starfish bones of your hour, take a moment to pause on the shore where the wave crashes against that shore, and let it be within that area where those skeletal remains lie in their natural environment, and keep watch over the tide so that it does not become consolidated, and bind the branch which you have severed during your work.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you are afraid, pause on that submerged spot above three inches thick or an Egyptian incense stick, or one of the green sticks, because when those wrappings burn, and the bones separate from ash, and they scatter those ashes away.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Mays is a great ox as much in Camba or Coissa or similar areas and that which of it is corrupted is the face so much, then those rays from there recede so much behind that they become blackness and corruption, but still remains the promise (hope).
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	The root of the tooth is greatly affected and the decay has already reached its core; therefore, it becomes necessary to remove such a tooth entirely where decay has occurred, and healing can only occur within that location once the decayed part has been removed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	You can find the example and help about my work on my website at this URL: www.yourwebsite.com/examples-help. Here, you will be able to see examples of my projects along with detailed descriptions that should guide you through them. If there's anything else I can assist you with or any further questions arise, please don't hesitate to reach out!
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A middle-aged man suffers from pain in his scrotum; as a result of the malicious acts he has committed, evil influences affect this matter within his body that reaches his scrotum, and it becomes an extensive abscess without any external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Therefore, the focus should be on extending treatment time for wound healing in which errors by physicians have occurred between when the inflammamoent has subsided and until full recovery of materials, as well as careful care during that period where a tight bandage is applied to prevent pooled fluids from orifices such as lumps causing irritation and moisture within the wound.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	Therefore, I do not blame the many talented people around me for being two years younger than me, and it does not bother me that they surpassed me in skill while I was called upon.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	I saw the jungle and all those things running in it from afar, these enormous beasts with their golden hue; by now everything about that man was trembling and his skin had taken on a yellowish shade.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	So you entered into one of those caves and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	I suppose you mean "I'll delve into the mysteries and trace those who are coming from all parts of the country." Here is my translation in English:
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	A dreadful event occurred wherein a portion of the skull was discovered and subsequently found to be rotten, with its bone tissue already decayed and discolored; moreover, one section within the cranium had been perforated by an object resulting in contamination.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	A, I'm honored that you found the surprise I prepared for you enjoyable and delightful! Your happiness means so much to me. Please let me know how else I can bring joy into your life. Thank you for sharing this special moment with me!
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	Indeed I decreed that it should not be in the soil but rather that contamination which I had previously eradicunted and separated.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	A) Pauseguia is a long-term antiplague medicine that has not been consolidated yet, and B) Pausegucuil is a short-term antiplague drug already in use.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	The article primarily revolves around the concept of exploration and discovery in relation to the first known instance while also discussing continuous corruption of these elements. It delves into various aspects such as motivations for exploration, methods used throughout history, impacts on indigenous cultures, and how these discoveries have shuted societies' understanding of our world over time. Additionally, it addresses the ethical implications involved in both past and contemporary exploration, emphasizing the importance of respecting local communities and preserving their cultural heritage.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	I am here to address the issue of water that appears from that contamination, and although I was obliged to make its cleaning and restoration, it has not been restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	Then you discover about the other variant and do not stop trying to introduce it little by little particularly and carry out its restoration; and it is restored within which you surround a palm of it, and this extracts its marrow, and appropriately restore it with medicines, and it becomes consolidated greatly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	E is not necessary in the operation of its veins and arteries for the dispersion of nutrients and oxygen throughout the body, but rather to prevent the fatigue of its muscles due to a lack of tolerance and fear of death at any given time, as well as from excessive elimination syndrome.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so may you be granted complete health, and nothing of hard flesh remain in you; and your disposition is made good within your body and restore the virtue of it; and conversing with your dispositions and not causing harm to yourself through walking or any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	May you be prominent in that place where the bone has been broken, and now let it be so according to this method: firstly, you take a ligament (ligature) and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminent bone, then command someone else to extend the ligament with another ligament thicker than the initial one. Then attach it over the flesh where the bone has been left; stretch the extreme part towards which to draw the flesh back, and you uncover the skin over the place where you want to make a cut so that the saw does not tear through the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	During the pause in the work process (fallow period), it is not forbidden to use a table saw; however, you should ensure that rotten meat is not smeared on its surface, as this could contaminate the food and lead to health issues.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	The rust on the iron gate grows little by little until it is in the hollow of the bone and does not appear at first glance to the observer, and soon the lock of another door appears.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are decomposed and do not stand out, one part continues while another is interrupted; at times you may discover the flesh of all parts completely, and after a pause it follows that of the first continued part which was within until the continuation of the other parted section.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	F is a small field according to the location of the corruption we have mentioned.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the knot is at a joint, it pierces that junction and cuts off his/her own supply from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	Corruption often stems from the continuous intersections of two key factors: lack of transparency and unchecked power. It is not always a matter of intentional wrongdoing but rather an outcome of these overlapping circumstances.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If corruption is in the mind of man or woman, it is indeed difficult; however, I suggest that you investigate how this corruption manifests itself to you and that you remove whatever source can be eliminated according to each individual situation which is possible for you, and as far as any engine may be rectified towards you, when not causing harm to your well-be
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	"Various species of bones are to be dissected and cut according to their situation, the preparation method for them, as well as their thickness, delicacy, greatness, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, you should prepare all kinds of appropriate tools for each operation."
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	The operation you are referring to is the use of medical instruments in your field of expertise; how much effort and extensive knowledge do you have regarding these practices, as well as experience witnessing various diseases. Often times, it has been your responsibility to apply appropriate treatments for each ailment.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	In this section, I would like to mention the number of instruments that are affected by the proposed ban and those which will remain unaffected. Some examples include pianos, violins, flutes, and clarinets among others. Certain instruments such as simple percussion or handheld devices may still be used despite this regulation.
Forma de serra:	Serrated edge or serrate form.
Forma de autra serra:	Another way to say "serra" in English is "range," as in a range of mountains or hills. For instance, the Serra Nevada can be translated to Sierra Nevada Mountains in English. Additionally, it could also mean "saw," as in cutting with a saw when used metapcuarally.
Forma de autra serra:	Alternative mountain range formation:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of another great mountain range: The Himalayas.
Forma de ray:	Shape of the beam or radiance
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this nail follows the shape of a claw hammer's head, and its points are according to the layout of the stars in the sky.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	The translation of the text into English would be as follows: "The joints are those that are connected to each cuff when they become corroded, or it is a large mouth." However, this appears to be an incomplete translation and might not fully convey the original meaning due to the lack of context in the provided Catalonian text.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	English: Present Simple Tense
Forma de razori menor:	English (Simplified): "Less formal manner" or "More casual approach." These phrases convey the idea of a less strict, more relaxed form of communication. The term "informal register" can also be used to describe language that is not as rigidly structured or technical as in official contexts.
Forma de razori lat:	Spanolish: Forma de razori en español: ¿Cómo se forma la oración en inglés?
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The other side of the mountain also has a steep and rocky slope, with the edge of iron being sharply sloped downwards and the leg members being shaped like daggers.
Forma de lu:	The English translation of "Forma de lu" is "Shape of light." Here, "forma" means "shape," and "lu" refers to "light."
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	In English, the word "razor" does not have a concave form. The term "concave" refers to a surface or shape that curves inward, like the interior of a bowl. However, if you are referring to a product such as a shaving razor blade, it can indeed be described as having a concaved edge for sharpness and effectiveness during use.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Spanish: Forma de razonamiento más sutil.
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Another way of expressing the phrase "forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat" in English would be: "an alternative method for bending to extreme curves."
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of small scissor-like attempt.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The way the teeth are inserted into the bones.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	"Form of lesser inscriptions" in Romanian would be "Formă a părților mai mici de inscripții." Here'ebbero the English term translated to its equivalent Romanian form.
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of an other shears; this appearance resembles a ray, and the tip is like a saw, and it appears in various places at different bone ratios.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The form of the bone that fits with the ratio of those pierced by holes is the "Foramen Magnum." This term refers to a large opening at the base of the skull through which the spinal cord passes. It plays a crucial role in maintainaturas anatomiques and neurological connections between the brain and the rest of the body.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The edge of the lens is triangular and has an acute tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	C is the son of iron from India, and it appears that all reasons mentioned for rusting, scoring, and sawing have been taken into account.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	The extreme sport of bone keying, also known as skeleton lock picking, involves unlocking locks using specifically crafted tools that mimic the function of traditional lockpick sets but are designed to manipulate the pins within a lock cylinder with minimal damage. This skill is often associated with historical reenactment communities and enthusiasts who enjoy exploring old techniques in security bypass. However, it's important to note that engaging in activities such as bone keying without permission can be illegal or cause harm to valuable antiques. It's crucial to only practice this skill on locks you own or have explicit consent to work with for the purpose of preservation and education within a legal framework.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The member becomes infected either due to internal or external causes, and if that infection is not healed by the medicines prescribed for it, sometimes the infection spreads without being caused by any of these factors. At such times, you should immerse the affected part into something with which the contagion can be eliminated so that the illness may eventually vanish and prevent death or severe damage to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of the one to whom this occurs, is that the limb becomes black inside where there is a vein or joint which has been burnt, or it gets consumed by the darkness within which the burn took place on that bone in the limb and thus takes over the whole body; therefore causes great anguish from such occurrence.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Apparently, as a cause of the corruption due to some venomous causes such as those from Scorpio, Mercury or Venus and Sagittarius.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corrosion or erosion is at the end of the tooth, you should fill it and not give space for further corroscuation so that it goes into the pulp (the nerve).
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Imitation if you enter the mine, always choose the path of wisdom and not spaces that lead to corruption within the furnace of life; let this be your guiding light as you navigate its challenges.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	The one who comes after, the hours bind his arm within the circle at the junction.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	The translation from Galician to English is as follows: "If one passes on corruption and evil times, the hours become painful misfortune; managing another cause or action in cure-all is a measure of virtue."
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	In the appearance of a serpent, avoid eating its fruit; instead, descend into one of its nests.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you lie on the slope of the hill, hours slip by unnoticed as time passes quickly.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May sneaks into the den, an hour later your insides are in the convergence of the den.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	Whether the corruption has reached its end in her body, at this time it is not death but dismissal and relieving of the illness to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of incision or severing the limb is as follows: you shall have two ligaments at the part where you wish to incise, and stretch one ligament over this point, and stretch another ligament on top; then extend your hand across both parts, and separate the flesh that lies between the two ligaments. The cut or severed area should be exposed completely so that it is clearly visible.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	Article IV - Disclosure of Party Information and Liability Limitation: Each party agreamo un obligation d'informar le partidari de totas partiarias de la sina datos personals, procurando no tocar ni influir en lo locus supranas. En contraesita, l'obligacion de lesio e ajustada apostema caut seran asumida unicamente per culpa dolosa o grave negligenza atestada per la jurisdicion competenta.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mays si decide to stop the bleeding when wounds occur, either by cauterizing the wound immediately or pausing and applying some powders that constrict the blood flow; then return promptly to your medical treatment once it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A) In the event of an accident, every member shall provide adequate assistance and care to the extent that is within their capability.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I will reiterate to you that the cause of the man's burn on his skin was an accidental event involving him, which involved me telling it to you; this incident occurred due to blackness or soot on his skin caused by the adhesive he had assembled with combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	Firstly, the contamination occurred in his own domain where he possessed everything.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Therefore, that man prepared himself so as to go and seek healing for his inflammamoent by going to the physician. Due to the severity of the pain and burning sensation he was experiencing, he decided to enter into the joint with a focus on finding relief from these symptoms. After consulting with the physician, they were able to treat it accordingly.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago, an incident occurred that caused great distress in the life of my grandmother.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	Thus I am released from it, and now the excess remains with me in water that rests on my mother's medicines; but the overflow is not felt at first and then begins to go into another place within her body where it started again.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	E el apêl elec me a inscidir la má d'lume, eu no volgi far aquo sperannda sober l'imprumuta de aquela superfluitate, e mai ch'temighi vos inzidenza de la mala mort, quadra era vorzenza del malauade sun cazement.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	Then may he who afflicted me be blessed and return to his own land, and bring to me news that the man prepared and inscribed all of his house, and is well.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	E has not adopted this narration but rather to provide information on that which acts upon those afflicted by this illness, and what its meaning is as well as the purpose for which it is used in accordance with which it operates.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Treatment of sinus diseases and the quality of enema administration with drugs.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	Quan accideys apostema en alc members carnosos, el espaciu de l'apostema s'estende per la coleccio de sanie, i es romputa i perforada, deixant sortir-los liquids malalts. L'apòsit sube a desembocat o es drapiavaiats pel sangi, i no és propagaats al darrer endollinament ni cap dins l'os o en nerviu ni cap dins la laminada; es un sinec.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is extended beyond when corrosion advances in any member, those times are called "fistula" and not "rust".
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The care of your hair lies in those inscriptions which are entirely wound around, mostly when they become fine and are made with thread, so that you create knots that do not stick to the place due to its decay.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	I hope that the code has stuck and that there is no further complication from it, and since you have had a displeasing experience with it, now you take care of that issue with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	E is that you consider the sinusitis, and if it lasts for a long time, and the person has severe odor emanating from their nose, then they should take an Egyptian medicament which consists of olive oil, vinegard essence, and zinnia extract. These ingredients should be evenly divided into a vessel and heated on a fire so that the mixture turns to honey consistency. This can help alleviate symptoms associated with sinusitis.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Head to the sink and pour some boiling water that is necessary and dissolve the alum in it; then apply the solution to your nose, and strain through your sinuses, and leave the medicine there for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Extract A Prophecy Regarding Water, and May There Be an Abundance of It for Many Days Until Your Body is Cleansed and Your Modesty Restored.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Some enemas are prepared with warm water and ashes when they do not have this medicine at hand, then you take the ash of wood vetch (Hedysarum coronatum) and pour it over the water; then mix them well so that an enema is formed to which you insert until the hours pass when it has become effective.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the disease is intolerant to both Egyptian medicines and ash water, then one should use a warm water enema with honey mixed in it three times, followed by another enema with warm water that also has something added like oil or liquid soap (because of its properties to cleanse and wash), as the oil helps to adhere to the intestine, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	In English: "Wash your face with some fresh water and apply a warm compress to the affected area; in addition, you may use an ointment that helps rejuvenate the skin, or simply drink plenty of water for overall health benefits."
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	E is a chemical compound, specifically an ester of dinitrophenol and stearic acid; it's used as a stiffening agent in some medicines and ointments that contain the properties described in the textbook on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the anal orifice is narrow and cannot receive the catheter for an enema, gradually widen it little by little using a small metal rod; then pause when wrapped in Egyptian or Basilicom ointment that has been applied earlier.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the orifice is wide, you should also sew up your lips and reduce the quantity within the amount of the suppository used.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifices through which blood flows are elevated above the body parts, the hours of dryness occur in the lowest place where the blood runs close to it due to being constricted within vessels, as when blood is compressed in the depths of veins and artereals the flesh becomes engorged.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If you are unable to dry the wound on your hand within the environment of an operating room, it is essential that you seek medical attention and prepare the injured arm in such a way as to prevent further injury according to what is appropriate for its condition and ensuring there are no objects or causes causing entrapment in the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Certainly! The sentence in English would be: "E is the list of comprehensive medicines that should be paused according to your convenience, so you can extend those prescriptions as needed." Here's a breakdown of how I translated it from Catalan to English:
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The thread should be of such quantity that it enables communication throughout the entire region; then, insert the needle's point into the correct end of the sinus canal slightly and widen it a bit so the sinus canal remains open; wrap around another piece of cloth from its ends according to the thickness of the thread, and pull over that for a distant position near the end of the sinus canal in order to prevent obstruction by the bracelet while wearing it daily.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The one who is above the abyss and who guides it at all times ensures that its flame remains alive within the chamb cuisine of fire.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	I know that you wonder what is the reason behind this issue regarding whether it is a lot or little, good to eat, or not digestible in your hand.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	A) Please pay attention to the location of that lesion, if in it you feel pain or not, and whether there is an abscess present.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	The medication is prolonged in the area mentioned, and when you see that the material applied over the wound's opening has become sticky or adheres strongly to it, after three days (or another duration as specified), carefully remove the dressing at that time and replace it with a new one.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be subtle in the sinus of space-time virus, do not despair from its adherence to you; rather, embrace wellness as it approaches, especially for those who generate caring energy during plague times and for those whose efforts are contrary to your own.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	The sinus that is inappropriately moved and swollete may not adhere; if the delay in adhesion of the sinus is prolonged, then you should adjust with medicines for dryness, and if those medicines are humidified in their substance and virtue, they become dried as much as needed when it is adjusted to an excessive supply of ointment.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The herb vervain is the last one to be taken in an infusion and oil mixture; it should be finely chopped, dissolved in rose oil, and then applied by gently massaging into your skin until fully absorbed. Use this as needed for its beneficial properties.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	In that action, when the mixture is not yet boiling, use the following ingredients and method to create a fine perfume balm: Gently heat a quantity of honey in a pot until it becomes thickened; then remove from heat and let cool slightly. Meanwhile, prepare an infusion by steeping myrrh resin and aloe vera leaves in hot water for about 20 minutes. Strain the infusion to obtain clear liquid.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Some herbs are administered for their long-term benefits and various therapeutic properties (such as celestial lilies) and ingredients like ergot powder and centaury, combined with adjustments of these simple or refined elements, sieved and ground into a fine powder. This mixture is then infused in honey which has been previously warmed; this concoction is known as "hydromel" (or mead).
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the condition is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, you should know that the decay is in the prepuce (foreskin), and already there may be signs of it in the bones or other hard parts or joints; then treat the inflammamation as a fistula has been formed, just as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	The treatment of calluses, scratched and cut nails, and the addition of extra toes involves care for these specific conditions using various methods such as soaking, filing, trimming, applying antiseptcuents or dressings if needed, maintaining good hygiene, etc.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaritium is an infection of the nailbed caused by bacteria or fungi that results in painful swelling and inflammation. This condition can occur on any finger or toe nail, but it's more commonly found under the big toe or fingernails. When left untre
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Then when you have obtained the oil that we have mentioned in the division and do not confer your care, hours cover those who you inscribe by thoroughly removing the excess grease and apply fire to the wound with this oil, for cauterization is considered helpful in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is your own and the gland is healthy, and the accumulations of the gland are discharged just enough to reach the tissues at the edges, then begin by pricking and leeches applied to that area. Wait for a subtle redness at the angle of the gland where you have pricked the flesh, and then push it in easily, slicing through the flesh as if cutting. Stop when there is a pus-like discharge coming out mixed with corrosive medicines until all has been removed; care must be taken to cleanse thoroughly inside that area once healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	The Mayfly's corruption has already begun in the bone; henceforth, you should implant and extract that very bone, for there is no time when it cannot be cured if it is still within the bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the corrosion and corruption appear in this writing, hours you shall cut it out when it is remembered one of the nuts according to how it recurs, and then as long as it remains within that which has been healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If you have a fracture or severe injury to your toe and experience intense pain as a result, you may consider getting the affected toe frozen at first visit with an ice pack. Additionally, try elevating and resting the foot, using over-the-counter pain relievers if necessary. In case of a sprain or strain causing the discomfort:
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	In the language of Mays Ajostramenta, it is said that he who is abundant in wealth and possessions among men, has much flesh on his body, but also has strong bones, or great strength in his wings.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	"The luscious grapes of summer now ripen at the junction, or is it the birthday of us in the darkened cellars of your words."
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one that is born under Aquarius (January 20 - February 18) often has a headstrong and independent nature, while the one born in Scorpio (October 23 - November 21) tends to be more introspective and intense. Additionally, those born at important conjunctions tend to have a stronger influence or impact on their surroundings.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	Among those who are not married, the section is easy to understand, and you should insert that of it follows this Latin phrase.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	From the moment of conception, treatment becomes difficult; therefore, beware of excessive alcohol consumption.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the place where you find these nuts, pick which one you shall cut at mealtime with your sharp knife into round pieces around the bone and then scrape along that clean spot as if it were already sanitized.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	"Mays shall merge all such actions that occur as a result of land movements or due to the birth of an heir who is not included in this, or for reconc
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	A proper pause between layers of fired clay to prevent them from sticking too much, and a separation between those, the pause between those is a thin layer of solder that is solidified according to its composition.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	If an accident occurs and the insurance policy is in force at that time, then depending on how it has been prepared and its terms, coverage may apply to the extent of the member's injuries.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	In the world of fashion, I'm a trendsetter.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	The vices are so severe that the veins become twisted and swoln with excessive melancholy, which leads to their occurrence in the members of the body, especially in the lower parts, primarily affecting travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	"I decree that you administer the purge against the plague of black death several times per week until fully eliminated, and apply proper pressure to the patient's femoral vein."
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Mays la curació de les seves amputacions és segon dos mocions: una és que estiguin inscioses i aquell sanc negre, i l'altra maniobra és que escolguin elevaix la vena i extriguin tota.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The segment of linen is second according to this method: initially thread the needle with water-soaked thread head down that when the blood clot is dissolved, it becomes gelatinous from the thread, and then tightly pull the thread at the upper part of the wound towards the lower region above the navel, wrapped in a bandage, and dry the vein in one place or two or three using a wide gauze, then elevate the blood flow with your hands toward the direction you want it to drain, until the desired amount is released.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Dear Sir/Madam, and I beseech you that you avoid the black plague-bearing provisions.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Prima di una flebotomia, controllare il colore del sangue quando le vene sono piene d'acqua; un cattivo sapore potrebbe indicare problemi.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Here is the translation of Mays' method for elevating his horse based on this technique: You should rub the muscles of your horse with olive oil and then wrap them in cloth or bandages; if it occurs while riding, stop immediately, place the affected area in warm water until redness subsides and veins become prominent. Alternatively, if regularly exercised, do not apply heat directly to the area without a covering, allowing the member to recover.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Cut the rope in the right part of the cord at a section near or at the end or at the bottom of your desired length, or at the lowest point of your desired loop.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Upon the code of man untied and excised the vein from every part where it appears in the body, you should gain the knowledge that occasionally asks for darkness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	So, please provide the following information about that white shirt you mentioned earlier:
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	To the right of this line lies an empty space that is raised and attached to the wall; suspend there an ancient oil painting.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	The following is the translation of your text into English:
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	A is the one that raises it over there and pushes on it from behind in the first section of the stem, and then again raises it so that it stands where it should in the second section, and finally pushes off from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	A water flow within the section that is higher or lower than all other sections, through which it entirely passes; and then turns downwards.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you do not follow your instruction carefully and precisely, hours can slip in unnoticed; so insert a sharp and sturdy needle through that hole and rotate the entire object within which it is placed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Look that she is not insulted; if it's torn apart, try to ease her pain and help alleviate the illness caused by it.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	With that whole array of therapeaturi, hours pause upon the place of the seaside submerged in wine and oil both roasted and unroasted, and cure whatever is inside that is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vine is contracted having curvature towards any of its parts, and it does not have the rectitude as we stated, then you should prune over that part with all the curvature of the vine and along the locations of enclosure of the vine, and approximately equal to that point which elevates the whole.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Focus on your section and be careful not to pierce the vein or harm it in any way, as this will make it difficult for you to elevate it. Exercise caution with that area.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Forma di incidente in cui è accaduta la morte:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a unicorn'n horn:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	No, it is not as sharp nor pointed like a needle, and neither is it of acute extremity so that it cannot harm the vein; rather, it has great flexibility, lion-like, for if it were subtle, it would penetrate the vein due to its subtlenamo. But it possesses an excessive thickness as we have mentioned.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Vein leg extraction. This is a medical procedure where blood is drawn from the veins in the legs, usually for diagnostic testing or treatment purposes. The extracted venous blood can be used to assess various health conditions, such as clotting disorders, anemia, and liver function.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the mountains of Himalayas, as well as in the lands of Central Asia and in the dry regions of Indian subcontinent where there's little vegetation or grass.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	Fear in other places is also generated from the same sources.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The translation of the Asturian text to English is as follows: "The contagion of lice originates from putrefaction, when they leave behind the tail so many venomous snakes and worms and scorpions and worms are born between the tail and the flesh."
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Signs of the onset of his illness are associated with this vein that rises in the chest inflammamoition; and near the location it becomes swoln; and near it begins to flow from the site of that vesical abscess, which appears as if due to a plant.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women conceive in the month of May, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more eight, and nine times it is my duty to verify that one woman aborts at six weeks, while another has conceived all ten times, with the cause being determined by a measurement from the glorious wise.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	T HEREINAFTER REFERRED TO AS "THE PARTIES", regardless of any other cause or circumstance which may arise between THE PARTIES OUTSIDE THIS AGREEMENT, all disputes and claims shall be resolved exclusively by arbitration administered by the American Arbitration Association under its Commercial Arbitration Rules.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If left untreated, the hours of exposure lead to a parting of light and it surrounds you; do not enter the realm of reason that is outside and free from harm, for if you enter there, it becomes contradictory and within in the body causing pus, redness, and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	The text appears to be in the Occitan language (also known as Lenga d'òc), which is historically spoken in southern France, Italy and Spain. Here is my attempt at translating this into English:
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	B: This vein runs through the chests of men, in their length for two feet and six inches, having reached me up to one foot ten inches.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If the wound is infected at the time of its dressing, introduce the lancet into the tract and penetrate that long track in the body until all contents are evacuated from the matter, then administer a poultice to the area for several days along with medications; and accordingly care for the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	There are certain veins that have some twists and turns, mostly when they appear at the joints of the knee or in the thigh, and come to open upwards, forming a number of exits or outlets along their course.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	So let us proceed as we have discussed in the division and with the water that is below as described.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the part concerning worms generated under the skin, it is called cattle disease (cattle eyestrike).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is known as Bovine Spongiform Encephalopamia (BSE) in any land; it was formerly called mad cow disease. It occurs when infectious proteins, known as prions, are ingested by cattle and affect the nervous system, causing a range of symptoms such as loss of coordination, behavioral changes, and eventually leading to severe neurological damage. BSE is considered a type of transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE), which also includes similar diseases in humans like Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	Generation of heat leads to decay of some fluids; thus, accidents occur with worms and snakes, earthworms, and roundworms in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	E is feared for its malice when it goes upon the body and rises to the head; then it swiftly becomes very thirsty in him and enters into his skull, destroying it instantly, and thus many deaths occur.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Then when you want to heal that wound and extract the liquid, it cannot be done unless you must first walk around it and appear from behind it, so that you have something on top of it and something left off it loosely, and then tightly squeeze out whatever is there.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	E is pre-owned in the flesh and does not receive any offerings; therefore your pause causes a fiery heat upon the place within which it dwells, and the main reason for its feared presence is corruption of its love, which destrops the place just as we have mentioned.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you ever come across an individual who has become unwell at the head of their household, spend some time strengthening your prayers to them and comforting them; also extract that which is causing harm, and cover it with something. Encourage the sick person to use remed cups or medicinal liquids for purging bodily humors, and be wary of foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the book of Healing concerning remedies and cures.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is known in our native land as "gout", and it causes pain that moves between limbs and sometimes results in the shifting of members.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	Certainnly! Here is my recommendation based on the information you have provided:
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	A woman fell ill in a village, and I saw her vein swell up on her arm, and she felt it throbbing for an hour, as if something were moving within. It seemed more pronounced than usual, like live silver flowing from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	So he went to the gym and accidentally injured himself on that machine there, staying in pain for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	B - The correct spelling in the other language (Catalan) for "Correct" is "Aprop." Corrected translation: Aprop en l'altre costat d'abocar a l'altre braç.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	A possible retranslation of this text from Esperanto to English would be:
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	However, I had seen many times before in the old books according to that manner, but I have also witnessed some cases where severe pain was transferred from limb to limpit.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May's love for water is as deep as a woman'cuan she loves the woods.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	In that moment it seemed to me as if there was no water but rather through the water, because the woman from the well had scant clothes and exposed limbs, body parts, veins; in this appearance I felt her vitality exchanged with the winds.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is essential that you do not reappear according to this reverse therapy in those who are diabetic and have a history of vein thrombosis.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	Ecchymosis is the medical term for bruising; it refers to the discoloration of the skin caused by bleeding undernecuasions following trauma or injury. To help a patient with ecchymosis and ease their pain, here are some steps you can follow:
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you don't heed our advice, then soon your precious trees will suffer from that damage of the storm and the rain that blows in; those foul odors and those toads of Serpina and their resemblances.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of honeycombs.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sagittas (arrows) come varied in types according to the species and localities of bodies upon which they are used, as that diversity is due to those having large tips, small ones, concave ones, mute ones; such are solid. And from those having three angles, and those wherein sockets.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	From what you have described as the second group of members and limbs wherein lie the brain, heart, liver, lungs, nostratury, intestines, bladder, and their appearance; hence when cold attacks any part of these members, it appears to me that thou shouldst avoid extraction from this sac in those cases where death follows due to major disorders, and when such symptoms do not appear, and the sac is not compromised in depth within a limb.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	El signo del servidor es cerca de las cazas en el ojo sagital; trespasase le os y se queda encima del hígado, por causa de una violenta sacudida, e sueño profundo, vertigüe, dolor en las orejangs, inflamacion y dolor de lengua, espasmo y confusión mental, vómito nervioso; fort leu es desunida la palabra y destruye el habla; se queda encima del lugar de la plaga humedad blanca como moco, e lagrimeo como si fuera agua en las mejillas.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Then if you have any injuries or wounds, please avoid the curing and draining of the sore unless absolutely necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Mays, the symptoms of a heart attack in the chest include pain on the left side near the sternum, which may feel like pressure or tightness and is not necessarily caused by exertion. The movement of the affected area resembles that of the pulse, with dark red streaks appearing on the skin, numbness at the extremities, sweating, and sudden weakness. Therefore, you must understand that a heart attack can be fatal if it occurs suddenly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The signs when the chest has a flaccid lung results in blood spitting from the wound, and the vessels that are part of the neck become swoleblackened by disease, and breath is expelled with great effort, and one craves air freely.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	The cat is trapped in the cage under the blanket, and the pain lasts close to small periods of time, and he has a very strong continuous ache and heavy sighing, and it doesn't affect all his body parts or muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If a cat swallows the hook in its stomach, soon enough it will start vomiting any undigested food from the meal.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the spleen is located in the abdume (belly), and it's fixed there, if there are any openings from a wound, or fabric, or torn material, and no hope for healing through removal of the spleen.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the bladder is filled with stones and causes painful urination, as well as passing blood or any other discharge from outside, and it becomes very severe, you should know that it can be fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other members such as the head, neck, throat, wings and shoulders, spines of the back, furcula (wishbone), keel, breast and their appearance of limbs, are considered safe according to major guidelines when the skin does not damage veins or arterries nor is venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I recommend that you pay attention to the following advice regarding these sights and their effects on your health:
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of this is that there has been an irritation in the lacrimal duct on the side of your eye, and you have extracted it to the other part by leaving behind the grays (swolard) of its ear, and it gets healed without any harm.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Extract another arrow from the Giant that was lodged in his cheek, leaving only the edge of the wound behind, and as it became hidden and could not be seen anymore except for a small bit attached to its shaft, which was one of the sharp Turkish arrows with no feathers.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	In the Senate of Justice, there occurred a serious accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	In another tale, there was a man named Crestian who found an Arabica coffee bean in his garden. This particular coffee bean had golden beans and it belonged to a special variety. He decided to use this unique bean for making the most exquisite cup of coffee he'd ever tasted.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	E exorcised an evil spirit from a man who had been possessed by it, and thought he might have died because of that; so, after passing over thirty days without showing any signs of his conditions improving, I pressed upon the spirit and extracted it out, and he was cured, and no harm befell him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	There once was a man who caught a snake in his arms, and secured the skin on him, and kept it by fire for seven days, until he skinned it off at the tail'angs.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	A woman was seen holding a snake in her belly, and the pregnancy continued within her, without any change to her physical state or condition, and the woman experienced nothing amiss with regard to her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	He felt another pain in his chest and the wave of nausea swept through him; he didn't feel any real discomfort or resemble this before.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	The princess of the king who was being hunted in her nearby nest had already given birth and the entire brood (sagita) was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	You are called to the care of Luke, who has been involved in an accident, within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then you will not see the wave that is about to break, and then you will inquire which one tempts you so subtly; but do not feel it. However, you hear its echo behind your right ear, and therefore suspect that it is caused by the edge of the wave.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	The vine of the valley is situated on an elevated location that overlooks it, which appears attractive and digestible to me; consequently, my affection for this place increases.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	In English: I do not have an accident at the place of significance where my little boat has reached; and I continue to be enchanted by it for many days without any accidents; meanwhile, the land solidifies during this time, and after some days within which a day passes before I sense in my nose what he told me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Therefore I will pause the medication treatment for acute corrosive poisoning after two days within which focus on rest, and now I have tried that and succeeded in slightly touching the tip of my finger, which sticks to the stick.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	In the article of the plague, if I perceive my foot to be affected by that acute medicine, then apply it immediately; otherwise wait for four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	In case of an exacebitious storm, it may possibly involve the laws in my intervention and remain therein, without hindering progress, these hours I have not ceased to become more subtle and ingenious on that matter with engineering means within which I began one day upon those matters concerning forceps-assisted descents performed, according to the form of such procedures at the end of the caputule, into which I extracted said storm.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Ealus metges decretó que el cartílago del nariz no sería restaurado y él lo reparó, y la piel se consolidó, pero sanecieron las lesiones por completo, y nunca tuvieron ningún efecto en nada.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Here is a revised version of the text with improved quality and clarity regarding the extraction of certain quotes, as well as rules and meanings that have not been previously mentioned because some parts of this article and definitions thereof may be misunderstood or not comprehended without further explanation from the book:
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The learned authors say that a little about much makes less; and the water which is now present is greater than the water which was absent; and it results in new operations and new instruments regarding the descent of external causes related to the craft, which cause accidents.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Thus, I believe that sentences are not arbitrarily formed by the members in which they are inserted, but according to two rules: either through an attraction of the location where they intersect or through the opposite side of the other party.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	The translation from the Romansh language (Sursilvan dialect) to English is as follows: "From that which is wrapped in a woolen cloth and then inserted into a body part, it emerges and becomes unwrapped." This sentence appears to describe some form of medical procedure or treatment involving wrapping an object in wool before placing it inside the body.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not comply with the agreement on the time at which the cattle are to be sold, and within a period of ten days after they reach maturity in their environment, along with their offspring and weanlings, then the buyer has the right to take immediate possession.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	If you are found in violation of this agreement and do not comply with its terms, there will be a penalty imposed for each day the violation continues, and you may face further action on any given day, including termination.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not follow my guidance carefully each day, the hours that you spend in the circuit of the track will result in little progress made throughout the entire race, and instead lead to an expansion beyond that area of the track where it should be amplified.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the screwdriver is inserted in the skull and has proceeded into one of the brain's ventricles, and appears to cause harmful effects from those accidents that I mention herein, then refrain from extracting the screw and leave it where it is until its presence becomes unbearable for several days; if the screw perforates the cerebral tissue, then death does not extend.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the nail is not bent but merely crooked and does not pass through the entire skull, and there's no severe pain for several days without any cause from such accidents, you should seek professional help immediately to remove the nail safely and properly. Do not attempt to do it yourself as improper handling can lead to serious complications or infections.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	In English, the sentence would read as follows: "Mays is not allowed to take out his boat at this time unless he has previously reserved spots on the circuit of the lake in such a way that they have been repeated, and also provided for a location within which it may be used."
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	May the net be cast into the depths of your mind and emotions, now you inquire if that which is true to you, then throw it forth with words as suited for connection, those suitable to the act of sharing.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you are unable to work on the soil due to flood constraints and its length, here neither nerves nor veins are present; then at times you will work within a flooded area that is expanded enough so as to be able to extract a piece of land.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If you want to open the ears and remove all attachments with your teeth from beginning to end, strain against it as much as possible; but think of how to avoid injuring the flesh in breaking or twisting off those earrings.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When extracting the tooth, use an appropriate amount of force in each location where it is necessary; and subtlety afterwards to ensure that the tooth isn't broken and can be made into a difficult extraction both from its position and during the actual extraction process.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you are unable to do the task within your hour, please provide additional days within which all pending issues in this matter can be resolved and addressed accordingly as per the agreed upon schedule or timeline. Please ensure that sufficient time is allocated for completion of each stage of the process.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	My condolences on your loss of blood, may you heal quickly with the remedies we have discussed in our capital city.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Pay attention to your hand's movements, which may be due to nervousness or excitement, and make an effort in any possible way to avoid the slip of the needle; this will help you achieve greater ease, tranquility, slowness, and steadiness as I instruct.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore make the saddle in such a way that the malady follows according to the figure as described above, for this is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	"Mays is not your enemy, rather it's an opportunity that you can make use of according to the given figures."
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	In cases where the tree saplings are illegally felled by members of the opposite party or those who have previously been part of outside parties, or if they intentionally clear-cut the extraction area due to dissatisfaction with the assigned district that is beyond their designated boundary and at times even exceeding it; then you shall claim over that land. The portion claimed should be according to the amount taken by forceps; then turn around and throw that piece, as it has been unlawfully harvested during the extraction process.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Mays is retained in the mouth, then your tongue rubs according to irritation when it presses into the mouth and intensifies as you push further outwards from that point.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	A little less time has passed since then, and now she returns to that which was on fire.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the log of the lever is in that place, you will push it at certain times.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Mays if the trunk is cut and you want to administer resuscitation, then intervene and help her/him, if he/she is unconscious, perform chest compressions as follows: on his/her bare skin between the lower half of his/her sternum and the top part of his/her abdamen.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the piston is concave, then the hours you apply pressure on it will result in force entering into it, as the piston is displaced by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the lock is rusty, clean it thoroughly before you attempt to open it; if possible and appropriate in your situation, lubricate that particular area of water with a suitable oil.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If you are squeezing the cat'nits in the stone or on your stomach, or near to the bladder, or on the side, and it is close to where that limb touches you when you tense up, then it may be possible to draw out something over there; within a few hours after this, try to drain it more thoroughly, but be careful not to injure any veins or nerves. If necessary for healing, treat the affected area until it is completely healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Type of forceps used to grab the needles: "needle-holding forceps" or "needle holders."
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The hands of the clock are like birds with wide wings that move continuously to cover the dial, ensuring it does not lose time.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	E of those are fine beaches with sandy spits and shingle ridges, varying in size according to the length of the beach, the difference between its widths and narrowness, and the extent of tidal currents.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of the concave contour at this tip was so similar to a penis that it prompted an erection in his mind; and stimulation from that imagined image within his soul.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Subject: Urgent Support Needed for Hearing Impairment
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Yes, Ray can enter the convex mirror as it is reflected along with the incident light at an angle equal to its reflection but in the opposite direction.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	The phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The puncture sites for phlebotomy that are most commonly used to draw blood are the following: In these verses from the Bible, specifically Psalm 23:4 which says "Even though I walk through the darkest valley, I will fear no evil, for you are with me; your rod and your staff, they comfort me." In the Book of Tobit, He tells Raphael to take from Adam's body the following veins which are connected to his ears - hair-like structures (auricles); certain herbs found in both temples; tears stored in two glands that are called lacrimal sacs; a vein prepared on the forehead; and a vein located at the end of the nose. Also, take from the neck guidelines (veins), as well as veins found underneath the upper lip, and veins found beneath the lower lip - these are called angelic veins. Lastly, gather two additional veins that extend downward below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that were just flushed in the arms are now clean. Quart de celles is a cephalic vein and it's called the "vein of the head" by locals; it's migratory in nature and comprised of both a branch from the basilica (basilar) and another from the cephalic. The people call this the "vein of the entire body", whereas the basilica vein is situated within the domestic latz and referred to as the "cephalic artery". Locals refer to its branches simply as "the abdominal veins", which are located over the belly button (umbilicus). The arm's vessels, pausing above the elbow, have a visible appearance and it is through these that venipuncture occurs. Lastly, salvatella is the vein running between the auricular (ear) muscle and its smaller counterpart.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In Latin: Venae tres sunt in pedem equi: una ex ilia curvatura femoris ossis cruralis; altera saphena, locus ipsius sit post tibiam lentis silvestris; tertia sapiens, locus eius sit post tibiam lenticularis domesticae. Et in tibia sunt aliae venae quasdam ad similitudinem haece.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The blood of the veins that flows through the arteries is an ancient cure and migrates, nourishes, and heals old head wounds and sores.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of that earring you're wearing is such that it should reach the crown of your head and be fitted at the back of the crown in the middle of both veins with a wide fit for good circulation; strapped tightly to the mastoid behind each ear, situated appropriamo
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the kitchen knife in your hand and insert its tip into the vein that runs through the leg where the snake bite occurs.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	A possible translation of the text is as follows: "The surgeon lifts your left arm and inserts the needle into the veins, carefully injecting it." However, please note that this translation may not be entirely accurate due to the unclear and possibly incorrect original phrase in Asturian. For a precise medical procedure description or communication, one should use standardized language such as English or Spanish.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	S be the length of the incision and the quantity of threads adjusted or around this area; and use your skill to sew as desired.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	A proper strengthening of the pillars and foundation is essential to ensure that it remains stable throughout its lifespresso.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	In the beginning of writing his book, he had the intention to include those and their cautionary tales.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The two veins, which also supply the temple region near the site of phlebotomy, are the external jugular and internal jugular veins. These carry blood from the brain back to the heart.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of a bloodletting procedure should be as follows, which I recommend to you: causing little pain with the tool in use that clearly displays the two veins while evoking the feeling through noticeable action and your pulse is evident; and later on, your sign will attempt.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	A) Insert the needle above the vein, as per your instructed location, and advance the catheter slightly beneath the skin. Then elevate the vein towards you using your other hand; insert the cannula while doing so, just like you did with the other two veins. Finally, let the blood flow according to the amount needed for your procedure.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Take off the bandage of the wound, and pause your talk about the vein for one hour, then place pressure on that spot and rub it gently to strengthen the muscle contraction, and let that area be healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	After the memorial service for them and those who were lost in thought and sorrow, we gather once again around the table of freedom to remember and celebrate their lives together.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Thus, the juice of fluebotomy from the vein at the front is applied to the fluebotomy on the cephalic side in order to treat old illnesses of the face and promote healing and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the flebotomy performed by you is as follows that I recommend to you; it is because the strong illness causes its vein to appear with a bandage inside, and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, whose form is described here:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the point that is prominent on the tip of the needle over that vein and puncture it onto its surface or another cause in the manner you prefer; then release the piercing pressure of the malady, allowing the blood to flow according to the desired quantity. Afterwards, remove the puncturing device from within that which is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	In some cases a vein is crossed by the flebots (veins), but it should not be assumed that the flebotomized vein is as sharply curved as other flebots, for instead of being on the outer extremity, it rather crosses from side to side and if the bone is close and strong enough, it would easily break through where the flebotomized vein is slender.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May rose water from the two veins that lie beside tears of two springs for skin irritation and redness in the spring, and cure diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the foot-bath is that you should wash away your own filth with water, and then apply the soap to your feet, standing on the edge of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	E should be performed following the guidelines for transverse lengthening incision with a few millimeters of skin flaps on either side, ensuring that there is no scar tissue at the location; and if the incisions are subtle, the extremity end is slightly shortened.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	To properly stretch before you start running the race, and pause on those points, then strengthen those areas for one night, and then release them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Mays le flebucelene of the nasal vein is said to cause acute fever and severe inflammaturge, as well as various facial diseases and migratory conditions that occur in the face, especially when old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the acupuncture point for this strong ailment is on your neck and close to your nose on the left side; take the fine needle long and thin in that area at the base of the nose, straight upwards, because the vein does not appear here and because the blood starts flowanno soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Meine letzte Adergießung ist der kleine Flohbotik: Ich werde sie langsam entleeren und es dem Blut nach Bedarf zuführn. Und eine Nacht später wird das Blut erheblich regeneriert.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Mays' juice of fleabane, used in bloodletting practices for various diseases and conditions such as leprosasters, impetigo, and other highly destructive ulcers like ergot poisoning.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	In the quality of that flebotomy those veins have left no trace of disease on their walls; and the vessel is over the top of the illness, with the illness lying beneath a sieve-like layer.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	A propeller, like a small pump, gradually moves blood throughout the long network of veins in the body; and it provides extra oxygen supply as needed based on quantity or times when required to water; and it has an appearance similar to other veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Here's the translation of your text into English:
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The juice of the algerita plant can be used for hemorrhoids and venous insuaturings in the lower limbs, causing small abscesses and blisters on the mouth and gum inflammation, as well as ulcers that appear in the nose and around the lips.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the phlebotomy in those areas is such that it alleviates the pain before you, and strengthens your neck with a bandage, and then revolves around your lips while examining the veins from which one arises on the right lip and the other on the left. One shows the darkness of each side through color, so more often than not there are small dark blue veins in that circuit; then you gently insert them into the vein with a needle.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	May I clarify something for you? You are not sure which one of those is the right one, and occasionally you try to discern between the most significant ones among them or the more obvious ones. Let me know if you need help identebrating the options.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	I cut off the appearance of those veins that are on my lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Maya usually injects the three veins that are visible in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Mays of the veins that remain below the tongue bring relief to the cerebral hemispheres located anteriorly in the parietal lobe, as well as disorders of the uvula and oral cavity.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of those plants that follow the illness among your cattle before the sun rises is as follows: elevate the tongue and look back on it; there are two veins visible - one red and the other black - and the color of each gradually turns to darkness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then flex your fingers and don't hit the table too hard that it breaks or damages its legs. (In this case "fleubotoma" refers to bending/flexing, and "quascuna" means fingers)
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The blood vessels that are usually found in all men and women have been flushed like those of the veins. There are two ways to do a phlebotomy: one is done using a small, olive-like needle with subtle declining angles; or it can be done using a surgical scalpel followed by applying pressure at the site (this is another method), and this is how it's done.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	An adequate assessment of the vein is that it should be examined for both its sections and according to those with specific characteristics, such as width and subtlety based on the extent of the veins and their narrowing.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Mistletoe: A Symbol of Love and Tradition in English-speaking Cultures
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The blood vessels convoluted that appear thick are the arteries and those containing clotted or coagulated blood are the veins. It is necessary to open up these hollowed out, convex-filled vessels so as to allow for proper circulation of the vital flu [fluid].
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the method of foliar spraying in olive orchards:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	A fine needle aspiration is of smaller diameter and more delicate tip, and is suitable for aspirating fine vessels that contain subtle citrine fluid.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The bleeding of the facial vein called 'basilica' is one of three veins: two others are associated with diseases that affect the throat and neck, as well as those causing swelling in the feet and abductors.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	E, the healthcare professional, should administer the injection with caution as to avoid piercing any artery in that area since an incorrect puncture or adjustment during blood extraction can cause bleeding and possible complications if you wish not to use a sharp needle, preferably opting for a non-piercing device instead.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica is not visible in a manifest manner, then at certain times you should leave that place and move to another, or seek some shelter elsewhere; or if you perform circumcision therein, in a location where it is clearly visible; moreover, do as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform the finger stick procedure of drawing blood, first warm the fingers slightly by rubbing them together for a few seconds. Choose a spot on your finger that does not have calluses and is away from any visible veins or nerves. Clean the area with an alcohol wipe and let it air dry. Hold the chosen finger between your thumb and index finger, applying gentle pressure to encourage blood flow. Prepare the lancet device by ensuring it's clean and loaded correctly. With confidence, press down on the trigger or button of the lancet against the side of the finger (not directly on top), penetrating just enough to get a drop of blood without causing excessive pain or injury. Collect the required amount of blood in your collection device following proper technique, ensebut not too close to the puncture site where you may cause an occlusion.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	Once again, take courage and trust in the Lord; flee from that place where you have been oppressed, for this inflation is inflation of pride, therefore avoid it at all costs.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	As blood flows in the veins like the blue stream of a child, and the blood is subtle roar; sometimes you understand what's happening inside the artery; then your heartache and pause linger on that for long distances; then you cling to your thought, and if the blood separates, many times it has separated, then your strength in your arms lessens.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	C has the illness of the common cold and is very worried about it for several days until she gets better.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the limb is not dead but merely unconscious and you cannot bring it to a doctor, then cut into the artery with your knife if possible; if that extremity of the body becomes lively again, the blood flows from there and pulls up one-third more than usual over the place of stricture or embolism within a day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If he who was scourged is released, it's well; but if not, then the hours cure him of whom it has been remembered in the place where ashes are scattered and blood flows.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The removal of the tumor in your case may be challenging due to its location and the possibility of arm movement limitation during the procedure at a small beach location.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Mays de la vena fusca (black vein) surgery is somewhat greater than the risk of infection from the upper part of the chest and below to the lower part of the body; this is because it consists of branches of the basilica (breastbone) and cervical (neck) regions, as we have previously mentioned.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The fear that exceeds the limit in your bloodletting practice may cause nervous discomfort; therefore, when adjusting the lancet for bloodletting, it may overstimulate nerves and result in stupor or prolonged convalescence, making total recovery difficult. This nervous feeling occasionally appears at certain moments of perception. If hidden from others with subtlety and not displayed openly, avoid performing a procedure near the area where you usually draw blood, as to prevent further aggravation of this weakness in your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	The vein is the vessel that lies between two nerves, and its length depends on its location in the body.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The blood flow of the venous phlebotomy in the cephalic vein is that it withdraws blood from the head and transports diseases to human bodies.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	In the actuality itself, if you want that the phlebotomy will hurt an olive tree or a myrtle bush; because it is the safest from all veins, as it does not reach any artery nor nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is recommended that you perform the phlebotomy while enscribing to keep the lancet from puncturing the scalp soleamoanly, and seeking a less visible location, not near light, if possible, unless the initial percussion over the area with the lancet has been confirmed.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, the eardrum also bursts in some cases at home when it is not treated properly during initial medical intervention, and as a result does not heal that well afterwards.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of May's beekeeping practices and the accidents that may occur as a result require careful consideration for their prevention and mitamization.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first thing to know about phlebotomy is that it is performed only for therapeutic purposes, out of concern for health and with the hope of preventing diseases; and that bloodletting must be done in one of the veins located within the fossa cubitus (cubital fossa), namely: cephalic, basilica, and brachial vein; and it should be performed at the beginning of spring during dawn or dusk in autumn, and close to dinner time during winter when indications for repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	In English, the sentence translates to: "E is operated laparoscoperen and they will do a thoracotomy on him after three hours from now." However, this translation seems incorrect as 'fayta fleubotomia' does not correspond to any known medical term in English. It could be that there may have been some errors during the Romanian text input or in its original meaning.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Botox injections which are administered, as needed and required by reason or urgency, at any time day or night, at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	Children under the age of fourteen shall not be circumcised and women over six months pregnant will not be circumcised until after childbirth. The elderly who have passed sixty years shall also not be circumcised.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	The Ecclesiastical Court of the Vatican (Ecclesia Sancta) may provide a catheter for any method it deems necessary to modify its bladders prior to cystoscopy, such as those having a retention fistula, so that blood vessels do not bleed excessively during the procedure on the bladasters, which are clean and will not reach the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E should not engage in botox treatments for cosmetic purposes or cure ailments unless they escape from illness and debility at the time of their recovery, nor evil of drunkenness, nor more that botox treatment is feared to cause abdominal colic pain and vomiting, as well as stomach discomfort, increased bowel movements or straining, loss of appetite, insomnia or other activities that dissolve virtue (or corporeal/animal strength).
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	B is considered in subtle ways concerning the diffusion of smoke across water if the sun is large, there are foods and drinks, and there are medicines as well if it is feasible with the water.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Article IV - No Infringement and Exerccuise Prohibition
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	After lunch at noon, it's the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	E fors dett that on that day of all evil events animals will be observed in that state of great distress, anger, fear, and of all bodily accidents, such as trembling, excessive pain, seizing, and appearances to others.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	A is the substance that usually has properties such as aroma and smell, oils, and similarities to those of other materials depending on its quantity. These causes are present in le us (the use) of this material by humans for various purposes. In English, we refer to it as "A" or perhaps more commonly known substances like essential oils, fragrances, or aromatic compounds used in perfumery and flavoring industnries.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the blueprints of a quail that is bigger than that of the one who was to be blueprinted.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Extract the blood from his arm and give it to your friend who is waiting with a syringe for three pints of blood donation, then wrap the bandage around them securely using the adhesive tape provided.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	E is the correct prescription, when the stricture is not excessive or superfluous, it limits the flow of sin and prevents transgression; or it is a mitigating factor, and it lightens the weight of guilt in conscience.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Upon the introduction of a strict rule that everyone who has been circumcised must remove their clothes completely before inflating and declaring their veins.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The phlebotomist applies a small amount of their own antiseptic properly; and then they place their left hand over that vein, just above the location where you want to perform venipuncture, so the vein comes out a bit, and the percussion is firm on those vessels which should cause blood to flow easily for the venipuncture, and from there are full of tension, and when the phlebotomist applies pressure to that opposite area. The needle does not pierce the vein, but if it does, it becomes narrowed.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	So let the floodbot operator be stopped and be concerned in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	After administering the flebotomy (bloodletting), if a vein is hardened in one session and hours later it becomes easy to access again; or else try another attempt on that location after some time, but don't delay too much, especially if the site does not show signs of inflammaturition.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the wound becomes infected or illness spreads, let it heal for a day or two without applying any bandages because keeping them too clean might lead to dry skin or infection. Additionally, avoid bathing as it could expose the affected area to bacteria.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	A) He appreciates the beauty of flora and fauna but is afraid of bees.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	The opening is small and runs thinly, and you fear it does not yield the amount of juice you want; therefore, in that case, iterate your squeeer on that tree according to its shape and adjust the pressure a little more quickly than usual before the place becomes inflamed because the location can become swollen in many people.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, l'horas no iteren sobre lu, quar non escausa a tu causeta; e pausa sobre aquel partida de la fenda d'oli, quar allèuga les cors del sang.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	E is better in this place than I and others used to be.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	In anesthesia procedure called venous catheterization is employed in the entire field of phlebotomy to block the flow of blood and prevent clotting; thus, during this process tyrosine aldohydase and sagittal sutures are observed when they reach a certain level above that point, as the blood is subtly moved and mixed.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a bruise is formed at the location of phlebotomy, it may result in significant swelling and discoloration, especially for those who are not bleeding heavily or have only visible veins with poor visibility. The hours following can be painful and uncomfortable. To help alleaturally reduce inflammation, you can apply a cold compress made of a sponge soaked in water and salt to the area for about an hour; this will help dissolve any excess blood and reduce swelling.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	F, which flows adjacent to the sediments of that vein as a gift from either this or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If you desire to create a yellow shade, avoid any presence of black or green color, and do not use clear water; if desired, pause over an aloe vera cause for adding oiliness and dissolving myrrh, or a sprig of mint or chamomile or similar liquids.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Swolvee veins may develop thromboses and aneurysms; consider sclerotherapy for the affected areas.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Then pause your hand over that wound and if you feel any pain from it, then this pressure is harmful; so be careful to apply the appropriate amount of pressure as we have mentioned earlier, because too much blood may flow out from the artery quickly.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	The heat from the earth stops decay and preserves the location, as well as promotes healing of any other injuries within that area.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	Extracting the essence from all man according to their quantity and worth, judging by the color of their blood as it emerges above the vein.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the sauce is black, let it rest for two hours before serving so that its flavor can deepen; and similarly if you see large pieces, let it rest for a couple of hours to allow the flavors to meld together; and likewise if it's hot, let it cool down until lukewarm.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	The vein that is wide and strong and requires a blood extraction in an animal farm should have its phlebotomy on both sides of the vein enhanced.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	Chapter IV: In case of any excess or overpayment in the agreed-upamonies, Party A agrees to reimburse Party B by deducting the amount from future payments as necessary and ensuring that such deductions are made promptly.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best that can be done in a venipuncture procedure is to aim for the cross-sectional cut rather than puncturing it directly.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This particular model of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve irritation issues, and it is more praised and safer than the transverse and longitudinal technique.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	The bleeding episode usually occurs after the phlebotomy, and take care that you treat it before the phlebotomy with a small infusion of half milk or simple oxymel scalfat; then extract from the wound in three or four weeks.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If you are suffering from constipation, hours before the flebotomy (bloodletting) take in infusions of myrrh or an aromatic tonic with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar ones, or in any fragrant and odoriferous tonic.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	"He decided to undergo flebotomy due to the onset of blood loss and, as he desired drinking water that is both refreshing and subtly scented, it was for its aromatic quality somewhat similar to almonds, and thus his thirst inclined him towards this liquid."
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	In English, this could be translated as: "E uses the other causes mentioned in the division at the capital of syncopation by exsanguination." However, please note that the translation might not make complete sense due to the specificity and technical terms related to music (syncopation) and medical conditions (exsanguination). The context would need further clarification for a more accurate translation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	The band will be applied and its sanitary cover removed for the second time, leading to the use of which the phlebotomy is performed in order to carry out blood evacuation, and the virtue of this device facilitates gradual bleeding, so it removes a small amount of blood each day according to the quantity of virtue continuously.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	In the unfortunate event that Mays loses control of his arm or experiences severe pain in his wound secondarily, and if he feels that his heart is strong enough, he should attempt to walk for seven to nine hours following the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	"In case of refusal by the defender's side to accept their challenge, it is agreed that they shall wait until the following day or the third for the duel."
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	"In the case of a wound wherein there is not yet any bleeding and it's infected, make sure to have the blood drained from the area using a bandage or gauze, so that there occurs an abundant amount of draining before a syncopal episode happens. Keep all conditions related to phlebotomy in mind; rest your hand on the pulse point near the wound site, ensebut do not overdrain as this could result in death due to a syncope rather than stopping the bleeding when an unskilled or negligent phlebotomist is involved."
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	E in the cove you want to unclasp your arm and evacuate the wound secondarily as soon as the artery orifice is closed; it may be a bit difficult for the blood flow, but press above that point with great force so that the vein swells slightly. Be careful not to apply too much pressure, as this can also cause harm.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	The English translation of the Occitan text is: "After removing the needle from the vein, apply pressure to prevent bleeding; or stop using a tourniquet after it becomes tight at the puncture site where blood has coagulated in the venous opening; or place the Tyrode solution compress on that area lightly so as not to cause swelling."
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is thrombosed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the thrombosis has settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	Q2: If necessary, you are required to evacuate the sanitary sewage secondarily and it is not an exemption; often your sink should be above that place or on the other side in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The "cavaedium" vein, also known as the "funis del bras," is typically flushed in the area of the forearm or upper arm when not completely detached or partially covered; it consists mainly of those vessels.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the liver biopsy is that during an infection, blood flow within the organ may decrease as the inflammamoes intensifies.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Rule Strictly Along That Line Across the Map, Not Diagonally or in Latitude or Longitude Lines; Follow Gridlines Closely Instead.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	E is the large opening and your syringe is the one through which you inject that into the joint of the small unit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If blood flow is restricted in the vein, hours later your leg may feel warm and you should not allow the blood to continue running through it until you have addressed your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the days of summer, those times you would be exempted from the act of bathing with cold water, and your body is cooled by blood circulating in cold water during winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all the others because below it there are no pulseable veins nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The botfly of the Savathra species is associated with diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the bloodletting is that you must bind your hand or your mother's, so that you have made it in an ice-cold water bath, ensuring that the vein is inflated and clearly visible at the time; then perform a crosswise incision. If you do this on the same spot twice without waiting for healing.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	Translation: And don't let her end the strawberry blonde with your sniper rifle, just because you exposed their bare nerves.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	In the water system, it's crucial to iterate the main valve in order for blood to flow freely through the pipes (vessels). If you don't rotate that valve on the main line, the blood will coagulate at the outlet of the vessel and flow is restricted.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	Extract the lamb' cuff according to your needs, marinate it in oil and salt for a while so that it is not too tough; and make sure you do this thoroughly throughout.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The fact that the bloodletting of this elderberry is used to treat melasmas (dark patches on the skin).
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	E acts in a similar manner to how he did before, during the bloodletting procedure.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The juvenescent vein of the flebotomy is to diseases that are in the posterior part, just as it is with disepshun of the mother, and retention of menstruation, as well as illnesses related to rheumatic conditions, ulcerations from old wounds and sores, and their resemblances.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the flebotomy procedure is that the needle enters its way into the vein causing minimal discomfort to the patient; and it should be positioned at an angle just below the skin where the veins become apparent, usually above a slight swelling or pulsation on the chosen site. The needle tip becomes visible as blood starts flowing through its lumen, indicating successful entry into the vein which then diverges with several branches within the patient's facial region of the arm.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, let's apply the appropriate solution to this problem and see if it is more effective and better than what we previously had.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	Avoid using botox injections on the face area of your head; it can prevent nerves that have already been affected from further issues and stop the type of injection you perform across the forehead if you wish to continue with these treatments.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Let S be the set of all blue socks. In English, this would read as "Let S represent the collection of all items that are blue and socks."
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	May stops the flow of blood; then use a clean cloth or bandage to apply pressure on the wound and let the blood run into the water that you have prepared, ensanguinating until it is fully expelled.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If you accidentally apply the flea powder in a wrong place, hours later try to remove it as much as possible, and don't worry about causing harm if used correctly, but be cautious with your nerves just like we have advised.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Create the illusion of similarity with another person in appearance.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	C moves from the sciatic vein and as you have told me, it goes to the toe on the left side of the wooded area.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The whisper of the bloodletting device is done with care to avoid any unnecessary puncture.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the flebotomy tool is that the illness enters in a boil-like manner, and with fervor it attacks the vein of its wide course under the skin beyond four joints at once through one long, slender band not seen except by water.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	So that when you see the horses appear on each side of the track at the same time for every horse and according to their respective speed, it's better; or ride in line with them due to impulse or disregard them due to distraction, because your place is secured.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	She is in love with two homes; and if you find that, the feeling of everyone seems absent, sometimes a leaf will blow against her window, and it's the one that appears on the second finger next to the earlobe and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Here the nerves and make your blood run as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	We loosen the regulations and restrictions on the practice of acupuncture points but strengthen the location, which slightly improves its safety.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Wind turbam i poznanie ich jakości wykorzystania tego tipo.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	There are two colors of corn - yellow or red.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Windwashing is made according to two methods: one of them involves scraping and extracting blood, while the other involves windwashing with their own extracted blood.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This gust of wind that is scratching it follows the two patterns, whether it's on fire or its fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	XI lancets that are administered by scarification and extraction of blood are as follows: locus I - a vein located in the neck, where only venous pulsations occur, is the last part of the head; Locus II - the middle location from the end of the collarbone to the ear; Locus III - veins below the chin and under the jawline just above the mouth; Locus IV - two spatula-shaped venous branches; Locus V - a vein overlapping with an artery, located on top of the forehead; Locus VI - two branched veins (forked); Locus VII - two scoop-like veins; and Locus VIII - two cords or ligaments.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Wind therapy, also known as theracian baths, involves the use of air streams from small tubes to stimulate circulation and promote healing in various parts of the body. This method is similar to how it's done through phlebotomy; however, there should be no fear that wind therapy will cause a fire or burn during any illness caused by overfilling where the entire body needs to be emptied out.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	May require the provision of food in cases of illness or continuous need, at any time during mealtime throughout the month and on its end, as well as at his/her place of residence and at any other suitable times.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of the disease in humans that results in increased bleeding from the head and is severe and stubborn; and those where it replenishes and strengthens on the face and on the head, and on the neck; and those where there's numbness in the face and forehead, darkness and weakening of the senses; and those that cause increased bleeding from their mouth or a caked tongue that secretes blood, and those whose taste for blood is multiplied, and those who experience restless sleep with intense dreams, pains, and other changes in appearance.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Then in any case of those mentioned, and specifically if it is on the third or sixth day of the month, let the commandment be issued to ensure that it shall take place no later than two to three hours after sunset from the previous day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The sensation of cold wind hitting the back of your neck is due to how that area conveys gravity in the head and at the point where it impacts the hair follicles. Moreover, this sensation occurs because the air there is rapidly evacuated from all over the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This bottle is at the phlebotomy station of the head area.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	"E is not right to use of that which belongs to the enemy in a state of war, or one in which there is plague, for it would cause great harm."
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	In the waters of that lake which I use for my ancient ailments and in its shores where it relieves them.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	The one who is above that over the former has caused forgetfulness to fall upon it; and beware if you command the windshield wipers to pause even for a moment in their movement at the edges, lest the generation of oblivion takes hold.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Mays ventosaziaco (wind-induced vasculitis) is located in the frontal sinus and basilica veins: for this reason it causes asthma, narrowing of the airways, hemorrhage, coughing, and edema.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	"E cove che sai empelìda la ventosa alcheja una piccola, quar se isté paüsàde, ingenera debilità in le core e in le stagnia."
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	In traditional herbal medicine, the essential oil of Alhagi maurorum (Alhagophyte) is known for its analgesic properties and is used to allepine pain from injuries and inflammations, as well as migraines. It can be found in use within aromatherapy practices.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	"Set the suction power of the vacuum to a level that does not puncture its mother vessel, preventing injury to the artery and ensuring smooth blood flow."
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The gustatory receptors on the tip of your tongue are responsible for detecting sweet flavors and slight bitterness, as well as playing a role in assessing potential oral diseases such as gingivitis, which can also be addressed through lip flap surgery.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The windproof cover that is made on the two spoons for mixing provides warmth retention during its use.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	"The valve of the two separated parts of the focus from the confession is located in the basilica, specifically between the three veins - femoral, cephalic and great saphenous. This valve prevents all blood flow through these veins as it returns to the heart. The lesser veins are situated within the larger veins that eventually lead back to the aforementioned three."
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	C commands the vacuum cleaner to not go through the process of scarification, because its location is completely deprived of flesh and only left with nerves and blood vessels.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	E is an herbal remedy that is commonly used to treat infections and wounds on the skin, as well as providing relief from sores and painful ulcers with yellow discharge.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	The fan should be set to a high speed and provide adequate airflow throughout the room; also ensure that it has strong, quiet blades with a polished finish for efficiency.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	"Twenty-eight pints of May's chambers reduce slowly but surely to dust, carrying off the essence from all bodies and bringing forth ancient sorrows from the bones and womb; it stimuleboes bloating and discomfort as well. It serves in place of fleam removal for two sheep and bloodletting or two nails."
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	In severe cases of dehydrebation, the heart may experience syncopal episodes in some individuals.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	E of the horses from Alhórcben to Doás Cambas runs past the horses of two fences.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the windows is that you should open them initially slowly and gradually, and not prolong the opening of the windows; instead, pause those liberally and close them cautiously, so that the air circulates in with their arrival warm.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	The process of wound healing involves several stages, including coagulation, inflammation, proliferation, and remodeling. During the inflamnatory phase, immune cells are recruited to the site of injury, which may cause redness (erythema), swelling (edema), heat, pain, and loss of function. These symptoms reflect the body's efforts to remove damaged tissue, fend off infection, and initiate repair processes that will ultimately restore normal tissue structure and function.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	In the early hours, he sifted and iterated his sauce sparingly, carefully considering the disposition of the customers.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	That person who has tender and rare skin should avoid sunbathing to prevent the skin from getting sore or blistered.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	E commands the fan to increase circulation and produce a little coolness, thus easing the sweat on the body.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	The sanctum is large and spacious, hours seem to fly by as we traverse its vast expanses; in the first passage it seems open is the subtle pathway to the sacred and to liquidity itself.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second attempt, data was acquired from the extraction of the large sample.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the fields are fertile, hours should be spent plowing the soil to achieve a bountiful harvest in the end.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Later on, when we want to extract just a little bit of blood or one small drop, it's enough for our sample collection.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	We wish to extract some blood for a test, so we perform a skin prick procedure; and if we know that the blood is thick, hours before it's recommended to do a puncture extraction.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term for "scarification" in Catalan is "tasca". When referring to the depth of a trench or cut, you might use phrases like "profunditat d'una tasca", which translcuates as "depth of a scarification." This would refer specifically to the depth measurement aspect.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the oil of which the essence is thick, hard, dark, and its leaves are narrow, let the winds from the vents be gentler, tighter, more resolute; if it's in summer time, just as olive or violet oil, or apricot kernel oil, or rosemary oil of a wild thyme; and if it's in wintertime, then rosehip seed oil, lavender oil, camomile oil, or sandalwood oil.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the abundance is great, it rejoices both lamps with oil of marjoram, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of nard; in like manner.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If Mays' wind turbine has large blades of carbon fiber, it is allowed to operate during hours when the noise level does not exceed certain limits, and requires that all locations of wind turbamines be equipped with a shutdown system in case of high sea water or freshwater flooding, or cold weather, or storms, etc.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	The one that produces a mist of moisture, dry its windows with vinegar and mint water or similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	E of that which the excesses are thickened, wash their windows in ancient times, or with water from Sansucco (sic), which is marjoram, or with aniseed decoccion, or chamomile, and so on.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	The windscreen must be kept clean in front of the wheel; ensure it is properly maintained every few hours or so, and make sure you sleep with the windshield wipers on if necessary.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What measures should be taken to prevent the spread of Plasmodium vivax (a parasite transmitted by Anopheles mosquitoes) before an outbreak occurs?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	I think the following ingredients should be avoided before meals (ante cena): those with strong flavors such as garlic and onion or who's been breathalyzed by alcohol; they might cause bad breath and irritate the throat. Also, one should avoid consuming excessively cold items like milky acidic substances, too sweet lettuce, lemon, cucumber, peanuts, and jellies, which can affect the taste of food or interfere with digestion.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	The birds of heaven (and) resting at their doves, and flesh of younglings cooked, and dishes seasoned with herbs, and the like.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	In the matter of that which is difficult to digest, let him take in drink almíbar or almíbar de jalea de membrillo (quince paste), and sumac, so that it smells moderately aromatic between sweet and savory; and may he be advised to eat lightly and sparingly of boiled foods such as potatoes, cabbage, carrobean and peas, pigeons, and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	On the day of voting and blood donation, the turnout should be higher than usual.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	B) You should not take this medicine before bedtime or after meals, as it can cause drowsiness. Also, do not drive or operate machinery until you know how the medication affects you; and avoid consuming alcohol while taking this medication. For your safety, do not self-administer injections of muscadylla (musk), alcelita before surgery or after fleubotomia aprop; to ensure that the main body parts are comfortable and the blood flow is subtle; and do not attempt any procedures yourself.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The English translation of the Catalan text is as follows: "I shall enumerate the zones where incisions do not heal properly are those areas that have been rested on their stomachs, and over varicose veins, gout, and umbilics; and on the toes' knuckles, and the ankle swelling, for these body parts do not tolerate incisions well."
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	E is not a cause for concern but rather an attraction of blood clots in the member, just as a rubber pump over the nipple during mastitis caused by leakage of blood from the arteries; and use of this to dissolve invisible foam within the member, just like using a pump on the abdard and navel. This rareifies the member and scrapes away its hardness and dull pain as it resolves the invisible foam.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	The tree stands still over the roots when accidents occur in its proximity or below it, due to a strong attraction causing nearby uprooting and removal of soil from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	It seems like the stomach and chest area require decompression in those cases.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	Here are these windows, they were only cleaned with water occasionally; and sometimes they were cleaned with soap as well. At other times, they were cleaned using a steam cleaner.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some poultices are fully saturated with water to treat skin ailments such as eczema.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	A. The water should be clean and cold, either from a source alone or in the form of springs with suitable herbs for water.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Shape of the windlass administered by hand: The width of the orifice made from two dits according to what we have formed it; and the amount of thread should be one palm's breadth; and its depth at length, in the location that is within the circuit, wherein the rope must be small, corresponding to the quantity taken by a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Fayta d'herba de herba ròca ou de citroni, de grossas marges o lionçol, genolls i tresors, tal com s'haurà estat menys que a sa posició en la llengua?
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	E be at the center of the red wire that crosses there or from iron, but it is broken by the flame.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	This glass of wine is the same as that which we have previously mentioned; it has a small amount of sweetness according to its illnesses and the condition of those who consume it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The valves of the veins are dilated and fatigued, except for those in children and young as well as large-sized bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of placing this windlass on a fire over the member that extends into the shaft is to place it with caution before lighting a small candle made of beeswax, and then pause it over the crosspiece of the transverse beam in the exact location of the windlass so that the fire may ignite from below. Care should be taken not to burn down the ropes during this process.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	A propinated upon the limbs of disease, and let it be spread over the wound that we have mentioned, while there are winds and we do not need to shout out loudly so that the smoke rises over that wound, soon after the smoky fog will disperse.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	According to the rules of Esperanto, and iterating whenever necessary, I express myself as follows in English:
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	A Mays bottle that is administered in the case of paralysis, water, which does not have a transverse or cross strap and is not filled with anything but water, and it is strapped onto the limb solely for support.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the way of winds: The stronger this breeze blows, the better it is, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	The word "Capitol" originates from Latin and refers to a building in which a legislative assembly meets, such as the U.S. Capitol where Congress gathers. However, there is no Roman numeral representation for this term because Roman numerals are typically used to represent numbers, not words or names of buildings. The closest association you can make with "Capitol" and Roman numerals would be if it was a number itself (such as 100), which could then be represented in Roman numerals as 'C'.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeches are not administered in joints or large muscle groups but rather in the smaller areas where it is not possible to create suction cups, due to their small size; such as skin and gums, etc., similar to a nose piercing.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The quality of using those that you have found bloodsuckers which are in the ponds due to pollution, worldwide.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	E apply warm compresses to the affected area on and off throughout the day and night, ensuring that they remain moist but not overly wet. Ensure proper hydrangs (draining) of blood during meals with a fleabotomy procedure and ventosas (massage). Apply friction warming to the limb affected by illness until it becomes red; then apply warm compresses.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	E cymru'n mwynhau
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	It's possible that the low pressure area is moving to your location, which could mean an increase in precipitation and windy conditions ahead. Keep an eye on weather updates for further details.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	When the sun rises in the sky and hours pass by, water flows through its course quietly and persistently until it reaches the sea. And so, it is washed, cleansed, and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the leech bite is prolonged and comes in contact with a concrete surface of the sidewalk, where it begins to ooze blood, after an hour or so insert a cloth into frigid water, and place that over the wound area where the bleeding has occurred.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the wound is infected, apply a multipurpose ointment over the lu vitriol trissat, or use gauze and bandages according to the staphylocaturcause; if the wound has been excised, pause for the maytats of fava beans that have been cooked well, and leave them in place until they adhere to the site, at which point the sanc is abscissit.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	A - If necessary, the bloodsucker must iterate over the elements; in this case, how to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If lice are prohibited from suspension, either shave or apply soap to the affected areas and insert a needle into the follicles within an hour; then they should be kept clean to prevent any infection.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	Evan wants to know how to cook cabbage; sprinkle a bit of garlic powder, salt or ash on them and sauté quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Chapter Three: Restoration
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is essential in the field of medicine; and it concerns the restoration of bone fractures and joint dislocations.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O children, I tell you that the foolish priests and commoners as well as those who at any time have not read or heeded the freedoms of our ancestors nor obeyed their laws in any way shall be condemned by this decree.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason, it was done that the circle of scientists in our land was privatized; and I have not forgotten about it at any time ever since then; nor have I employed it until now, but only through reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding therein from which I extracted scientific knowledge.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	The following are some research and experiments conducted in the field of longepertence (life extension):
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Herein is described in this chapter all that I know concerning the subject matter upon which my experiments have been conducted; furthermore, to those of you who are acquainted with it and occupied by its elongation, I declare its lengthening; at the end of its lengthening, it shows various forms of distortions that result from administering additions as has been done in previous chapnits.
Capitol primier.	First-class mail, also known as capital or priority mail in some countries, is a postal service for delivering standard letters and small packages quickly and relicuosly to recipients within the same country or internationally. It often includes features such as tracking services, insurance options, and signature confirmation upon delivery.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summae et collectiones ex esse frustrae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necesse est, antequam incipiamus rememoratio membrum fragmentorum varii et singulorum.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	In the beginning of this chapter, I shall present to you the essence and themes of these sculptures. At the onset, the artist's intentions and perspectives concerning those subjects were somewhat obscure; however, now that you are acquainted with this noble art form, you will better understand and appreciate its significance along with others who have also gained knowledge or acquired an interest in it.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Therefore, if you experience a bone fracture, dislocation, twisting, or crazing, it is adviswart that you seek medical attention at your earliest convenience through an open reduction (surgery) or closed reduction (manual manipulation), depending on the circumstances and unless contraindicated for any reason. Additionally, certain factors may increase the risk of complications such as osteoporosis, previous injuries to the affected area, extreme age (very young or old), high fever, or severe chills.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	A proper content in veins should consist of herbs and vegetables, as well as lean meats from poultry and rabbits; while avoiding fatty foods and filling the stomach with any kind of substances that cause blood clotting, provided there is no history of hemorrhage or fear of excessive bleeding in any member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Now she returns to her original troop, with which she is accustomed to serving.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	So the broken bone begins to be restored, as soon as the malady has passed from consuming nutritious foods rich in protein and fat like bread made of wheat with water, cheese, eggs, fish, meat from cattle, butter, fresh peas, and similar things, and under this regimen a coagulation of fracture is formed more quickly and easily.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	E species that live in the forests and those who live on land as well as elderly people, cannot be expected to remain active or continue growing according to their nature due to the drying of their body parts.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	E are solidified and continued according to their nature forever for the drying of those parts, and they continue and solidify those that still have in the end of mercy, just as the bones of little children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Yet nature also adjusts and corrects every torn piece of clothing from any cause that may seem similar to gluttony which adheres and strengthens within us with conglutinations and liaisons, within which lies the root of fragility and weakness, just as fire during a feast, unless there is no reason prohibiting one's actions.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary that you abstain from foods of the evil nature, namely those which are heavy and sticky, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Type of fracture depending on the type of limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	The types of bone fractures are diverse according to the variety of members, so a fracture of the femur is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the phalanges is different from a fracture of the spine; similarly, all other limbs have various types of fractures.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	Here is a recollection of the entire category of bone fractures, distinguished from one another in their respective classifications within this capital.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Type of bone fracture in the left tibia.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The species of bone fractures in Lor meyssas are quite diverse; one is an arched fracture that occurs when they happen under stars; and some cases exhibit a fracture according to the length of the bone: and there are fractures from luxation, avulsion, displacement, progressive or non-progressive, as it appears in writing while being prepared, also an open fracture and disruption in the skull, and small hairline fractures.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	Article 48 of the Civil Code states that trademarks must be unique and not cause confusion or infringe upon existing rights within a particular field, including its subsequent renewals. Trademarks cannot have any direct association with past brands used in the same locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Signal of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The translation of the text from Catalan to English is as follows: "E per acqua es congida una fractura del os: el torzulo de lu, e de aquel eminencia y appericio d'aquell qui sentiments al tues am la tua ma."
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Thus, if you don't experience any apparent twistedness or feel of your touch when the bone is moved with slight irritation and it doesn't cause much pain, then there is likely not a fracture present at this time.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It's possible that you may experience minor tortuosity or small fissures, but do not worry as this is common and occurs due to compression of the entire tube; please take breaks from any medications if they remind you of a time when it was necessary. And keep up with your prescribed treatment regimen for mild strictures.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	In case of illness or accident preventing you from fulfilling your obligations at any time which does not result in the loss of goods, as soon as possible after becoming aware of such event, notify the concerned party and take appropriate steps to rectify the situation to the best of your ability.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If the thumb blister is small and not severe, you can use simple home remed cuing to relieve it within two or three days when the blister heals; then according to each method that you have of levitation and engineering.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	The restoration and refinement of a certain oil is considered to be less expensive than the one in which accidents occurred during its production.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	A strong appeal shall follow upon the remembrance of you.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If you are in the US and suffer from a severed limb (arm or leg), here is what to do depending on the situation:
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	E is your position and place where you will pause the limb according to its natural figure, while those parts of the limb that have been stretched out are relaxing, now it's essential that you make them return to their original length and in accordance with each manner that they can be located.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	You shall uphold the commandments with all your strength, so that no harm comes upon those who work for you or due to damage; and strive according to your ability to ensure that each one loves their neighbor as themselves in the best possible ways.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	At that hour profitably touch your mother'ease here, and if you see there any different cause, correct it and equalize it by the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	E exquisita e varietà estensione ed compressione, così come con molti movimenti frenetici dei muscoli che si verificano a causa dell'infortunio o possono derivare da un contraccio nel membro, così come abbiamo visto l'acqua per il movimento delle sue molecole.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Regarding the adjacent area, maintain a proper proportion and balanced condition of that member; ensure rest and tranquility; warn against overuse during times of vigilance and sleep, as well as its movements and agitation; take care to avoid any strain on all its functions; and wait until the position of the body part is such that pain or injury is relieved. This often occurs when in a position where stability is achieved for the injured area or joint. It is adviseby health professionals that you should change positions frequently, always seeking comfort and avoiding strain during the healing process; maintain correct posture so as to prevent any abnormal curvature of the restored body part.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the strictness of the members attached is that which I recommend to you; for you should know that fractured members vary greatly in their smallness and greatness, and also in their shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	A of those who are small like the arm and the forearm and appearance similar to those, at times she covers herself with a very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	In those animals that are so large like the cow or the buffalo, there should be an involucre and a dura (outer covering), for the ligaments connect the limb joints firmly from all parts causing strictures, in such a way that no impurcuarities can enter.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	C: Begin by applying the ice pack to your injury area, pause for convenient intervals as needed, over the location of that fracture in one or two layers (wraps). Strengthen your arm a little with the support sling.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	A) At the point of departure from the site of injury, and before ascending further, be careful not to tighten your restriction at the location where you previously strained the injury site.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	A topical application near the site of the fracture will slightly soften the tightness gradually, so that you can grasp a large portion of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Clean up the area around an adjacent wound and place a clean dressing over that previously dressed wound, ensuring it completely covers any remnants of the previous bandage; then proceed with your work on properly applying and gently reinforcing the new dressing as instructed in the initial covering.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	The interval between the cessations of sleep in Leon or during the event which is equivalent to the twistiness of the fracture, if it is indeed twisted; and otherwise, do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	A prop for the other bandage, and apply it over these sterile gauze dressings made shortly ago, if in this place there is no inflammatur or abscess, and keep pressure on that which is the inflammation and that of the pus; leave that uncovered for a few days; and then tape up those bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The leaves of the pine tree variety are green and well-formed; they can be either solid wood or made from palm fronds. Each leaf's width follows this shape and form: oval, elongated with a pointed tip at each end, symmetrically arranged on both sides of the stem, connected by a central vein that splits into smaller veins towards the edges. The surface may have fine serrations or smooth margins depending on the specific variety.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	Empero (However), Cove (ensure) que la astilla (the splinter) que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sea pus grossa (as thick as possible) e pus lada (and as wide as possible) un petit que las autras astelhas, y la longitud de la estela (length of the splint) según qué es legut al membre en magnitud (according to what is suitable for the limb in size and length), e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am otra benda segun la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, y es que sia la túa strictura según le loc de la fractura mes (and the splint should be positioned according to where the fracture is located and how far it extends from), e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The threads may have varying thickness and fineness; if the threads are thick, as I've seen in the process of loosening screws by cutting the strings of the torque wrench, it's a significant error when the tension is not equalized.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Messages sent through subtle hints may not be suitable, as you cannot guarantee that only the intended recipient will read them and there's a risk of misunderstanding between signals if they are not clear.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	The translation from Raeren dialect to English would be: "However, if the illness is located at the extremities of the stones near the narrowing in its places, then those pauses will stop after that spot where they do not cause any harm."
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some earthquakes cause landslides and ground displacement, and I come to remember them at the Capitol building as a symbol of its unique significance.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	E sapiens that have lost their limb in an accident do not need to rest on the prosthesis from day one; this condition should be taken into account when choosing a prosthetic, so it does not require resting upon the stump for days or weeks, but rather depends on your comfort level and risk of developing inflamm
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the ancient method of healing in which they used stones, a practice that involves breaking and repositioning or twisting bones.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manieyra is a traditional dish commonly served in restaurants during the Lent period, mostly for women and children; it's a type of polenta made from milled wheat flour that involves stirring over low heat to prevent burning or sticking to the pot.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	B doesn't agree with them as much as one might think from his earlier work, the "House of Leaves" album; and he deliberately avoids making it too thin or subtle; and instead uses that approach.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	Thus, when the extremity appears from the hole, wait until you wrap around that portion of lead whose weight is equal to one dram. Afterwards, tie that piece and leave it hanging from a branch.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	"Recipe for the Miraculous Healing Poultice to Treat Fractures, Dislocations and Sprains"
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	The small town was nestled in the mountains, where the locals enjoyed their daily lives and customs with a sense of community and tradition. They had their own unique festivities, special dishes, and traditional attire to celebrate their heritage. The sound of laughter filled the air as children played games while adults gathered around for lively conversations.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manieyra may cause joint dislocations and separate bones, as well as accidental pain in those areas, fissures, and fractures. It can be sutured with lana thread or submerged in warm water and oil to soothe the affected area, as well as rest it on a soft surface.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this particular plaster preparation, there is no restorative or anti-inflamebl property; it mainly helps to alleviate pain directly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	To make a paste that restores the tranchet (a prehistoric flint tool): take fig tree seeds and poppy seeds of wild-growing plants, mix them all together to form a paste with linseed oil.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	To treat a bone fracture and how you would like to resolve the swelling from an abscess, here is a recipe using ingnola (also known as bitter orange), camomile flowers, violet flowers, barley flour, divided into equal parts. It's quite annoying that out of all the members, I got burnt by the coffee.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	May take a shower to cool off and either drink cold water or use a damp cloth.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Here is the translation of the recipe from Catalan to English:
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Mayes Ypocras does not prescribe for the patient's liberated limb which has been dislocated to be restored, with the exception of a waxed and oiled cloth made solefly from wax; moreover, let it be mixed between thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	It is also seen that there are some pains around the severed limb during the restoration of its warmth and the causes in which it becomes deficient in heat so as to mimic myrrh, oils, and similar substances from those causes that have been recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Remedy for bruises, swelling and pain: Recipe - Mix together equal parts of crushed comfrey leaves or chicken feathers (or if available), althea root, salt; Grind into a fine paste with triturating mills or mortar & pestle. Apply as an ointment to the affected area for relief and healing.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Based on the condition that if you experience pain or discomfort, a broken bone, or any other issues, it is not advisamble to continue stretching for more than six days without consultation from a medical professional.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you experience a sharp pain or severe swelling or inflammamoent at the site of the injection, contact your doctor immediately during office hours or on-call if outside those times and follow their instructions regarding dressing it up.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Wrap the inflamed member in a linen cloth and compress with sea sponge soaked wet, then immerse that in tepid water; and let it rest within the container until the prickling sensation stops and the pain subsides; and afterwards relax for an hour. Then place it over soft wool immersed in lukewamoil and olive oil or rosewater, and cover with a cloth through the night to ensure no infection develops, and experience relief from inflammation and pain reduction.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	A proper application of that subtle essence and blend it slightly without exceeding your initial constraint, so as to maintain its purity within the substance.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	"And then you shall experience the healing of pustules and swelling, pain, inflammamoins, all accidents which have already been removed from your entire body, as well as relief from cramping and strictures."
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If he does not accede to any of the causes mentioned earlier, then within three or four days, or even five (v.ii.), it shall be lawful for him to depart from that place. The translation of this text from Old Catalan to English is as follows: "For the wounds that are filled with water for twenty days after you appear for the dislocation of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and it rests on the coagulation of the flesh over it."
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	The rules of Hebrew grammar adjust more strictly in the first set than in the second total, and align with the increase of the food'veiling misfortune, as it is mentioned beforehand.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you happen to come across the site of a fracture, ensure it is properly dried and immobilized but do not cover it with anything; know that heat should not be applied directly to the injury; instead, provide plenty of water or other liquids throughout your shift; let the area remain exposed for three days. Slightly loosen the bandage after this period, as circulation can then start and healing occurs effectively.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	Mays does not allow the owners of other restaurants to reopen while a member is undergoing repair and restoration, as it can cause inconvenience according to their policy, and there's great concern if they were to do so unlawfully; doing this could potentially increase liabilities for both parties involved.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	Actually, I have seen several of them go for a swim, so it is quite reasonable to assume that water doesn't scare them.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Second Capital Rule: Injuries occurring on the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are varied, and their figures are diverse, with distinct causes, none of which is made by a blow from a spade, and the impact strikes all within the bone completely enclosed, leaving only the outer layer of the bcheecec, so as to resemble a cleave in wood; or the spade cuts into some part of the bone, cutting through the flesh but not penetrating beyond its farthend; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The degree of this wound from these two fractures is great or small, and whether it's a simple fracture (fractura) or comminuted fracture; its cause may be due to blunt force trauma or falling on a stone, and similar appearances.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	Here is the translation of the text into English: "Here there is this fracture or it's penetrating towards the panniculum which lies behind the bone; it is on the face of the bone, and the plague of these two types of fractures can be large or small."
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	Fracture of the eggshell is that it is chipped on the bone, in the subtlety of the hair fine, and for this reason this specific type of fracture is called a capillary fasteration.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	E is a fracture that occurs due to the impact of stone or by striking with a rock, which causes an inward movement of a thin layer of bone on either side, and it happens similarly as in skull accident cases when they are struck causing cracks and separation from one another into two parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	The majority of human bones are made of calcium and phosphorus, just like the shells of eggs.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	So these are all of these special types of fractures and stress risers; they also include stars as well as separated blades.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	The entire body of water remains at rest in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	I abhorred all these types of cracks, such as detection and inquiry for temptations and accusations of corrupt flesh upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	An unusual capillary is known as panniculus reflexa which appears over the skin and it absorbs, and runs over his thickness, because the break looks black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, accidents related to illness and their duration should be taken into consideration when determebling if it has a significant impact on causing fear or anxiety, as well as other symptoms such as vomiting, delirium, loss of appetite, insomnia, high fever, diarrhea, and the demand for attention from those affected. Similarities to these accidents in cases with major predisposing conditions should also be considered and not ignored if they are not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If by chance you become ill and hope for a cure, then it is time to start your healing process.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Because it was brought to your attention in the beginning when you were at sea and during winter days, it is recommended that you study on Mondays before the fourteenth day following all arrangements.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is during the summer days, and you have spent many hours basking in the sun before the seventh day, ensure that your skin has been sufficiently exposed to the tan and avoid any incidents that may arise as a result of overexposure.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the skull fracture reaches the underlying panniculus carnosus and is fragmented into small and irregular pieces, then cover the wound with sterile gauze or dressing as recommended to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	E is that you shall be aware of the evil sicknesses (or plagues), and uncover them according to your customs and means as much as possible based on the nature of the disease, and that you should seek knowledge about the illness.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	He seems to have decided that you need to check for signs of infection or an abscess drainage, so now you should wash your hands with warm water and soap. Also make sure the place is covered with clean gauze pads wet with vinegar or olive oil, and let the wound rest until it's less swoln (or inflamed). Then proceed to start around the bone area and towards the edges of the injury site; ensure there are no signs of bleeding.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	There are two methods of operation to achieve water.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The riddle refers to scissors. Here is the solution in both languages as requested:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	A propaedeutic course provides more insights and less pressure than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	In case you wish to sign up as a subscriber with various names wherein some of you are more numerous than others; and those who have fewer members shall be shorter in length than the others, and they must end with the letters 'ir' or 'et'.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	U uses his/her own skills in playing the drum over the scissors to prevent hitting your head and ear.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is strong and hard, it may withstand hours of drilling in the frontal circuits that you administer to section off the branchlets, which are not deeply entrenched.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	E is not named as such but rather those who do not exceed the term of its shank at that point to which it is properly attached, for so the tarsal extremity or margin lies above that which remains behind the head'aturally appearing as a margin or small circle, this one prevents from being submerged and passing beyond the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	E is convenient that your fangs have a great number of which some may suit the sharpness of each tooth, so that in every part of your skull there exists such an extremity with its acuteness corresponding to the degree of sharpness in length and width as required by each particular tooth.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three species of teravels (drills): The feature to perforate a severed bone circuit is that you stop the drill on the bn and rotate it with your fingers as long as you know the bone has been penetrated; then, without delay, move the drill to another location, and pause until all the material of the hole or tunnel created by the drill bit has been removed.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	A prop is situated between certain bones of the body and contains a subtle fluid that allows for buoyancy in water, as we have mentioned; therefore, when removing this organ (the inner ear), you must also carefully remove surrounding delicate tissues such as nerves or blood vessels. In addition to using specialized instruments like fine-tipped forceps and suction tubes during surgery.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	B) Please ensure that the scissors do not damage any of the fabric.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	Thus, you shall have circled the perforation, and then separated it from the cipher if it continues on its own; you will extract that which resembles keys and equals that in the roughness of lu water that is in the bone as another instrument similar to scissors, but however so that they may be more tapered and finer than the other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If you have any skin irritations or sores, do not use this product. For optimal results, ensure that your skin is clean and free of lotions; also avoid using the following products as instructed earlier in the guide.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is the dishonest and distant from fear, which dissected Gualia and the Lauzeck with great praise; and this is his speech on it: It is necessary for you to begin by discovering where the bone fracture is most pronounced and visible, within which once you have uncovered that point, gently ease along the length of the incision made by a slow and happy scalpel - this is its form.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Article LXI - Procedure for Suturing Long Bones
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	E apoplectics about the scissors of a particular pair that he had previously used and thought were perfect for his use, as they facilitated an easy pivot, and you too can be sure of the panniculus which does not occur in any accidental manner; indeed, if the medicant1e was the most common of all men and the least educated among them, and certainly he was dozing.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Lahora's Romania had no legal cause for annexing the Balkan territories located there, and if it were to separate from them through lenticular division, it would relieve itself of its troubles, as well as alleviate its fears since it has suffered harm.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	When the fractured bone does not penetrate into the subcutaneous layer, and if it remains attached to the underlying structure, causing skin irritation or sensitive spots that require removal of those subtle lesions with razors in order to prevent possible complications from all over the affected area where you have prepared a number of diverse quantities to be administered as conveniently and properly as possible throughout the location of the fractured bone, which has been severely damaged.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	Administer the following mixture in your opinion as a beginning of those remedies, and use it to its full subtlety, and continue doing so according to continuity until you reach administering the most potent essence and the most refined part of all such remedies.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the other small vessel or subtle fractures, indicate that you administer care according to how much it is lost for correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	E is not fond of all the topics that they have studied in this field.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	The sentence in Catalan translates to "Situations like this always remind us of the importance of water, which we have shown through great efforts." in English.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	Once you have removed the yolk from the pancake, cover it with the desired amount of syrup according to your preference, and submerge that in warm oil, then place it on the side of the plate; afterwards take another piece of dough folded or tripled over it and submerse that in egg wash and olive oil, and place it on top of the first one as much as possible without causing breakage. Then administer any leftover syrup onto that layer only as much as you have left, and do not move it except for just enough to coat it.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Layassa assail - this remedy for one or two days to ensure safety from the cauterizing burn; remove it and apply medications with excessive dryness, as in linseed and wheat flour mixture, and powder of eggshebones and other such substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	E is that you use these powdered medicines by sprinkling them on the wound once they are dry; and universally, apply all medicine of properties which repel and do not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Watch carefully on how the plague in your care may be kept clean; it must not be covered with ointment or any other substance; nor should you add anything to intensify its effects, for when placed upon the panniculus of the brain, once corrupted and putrefied, it can aggraamoor illness due to this malignant malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	Accidents in the crown of the head, as when he is afflicted by him and most often when he prescribes its cure; also blackness on the surface; therefore consider whether these accidents pertain to the illnesses mentioned above.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	However, if it's not about the medicine that is being suspended unusually and it is due to this medicine causing those blackouts, then occasionally you may experience moments of euphoria from taking a portion of honey or orange oil portions. The patient presents with multiple linear scratches and wounds on the skin, and they are experiencuing pain in that area. They have also been applying an ointment over those lines; as well as using herbal remedies for healing that are appropriate to their condition until they're fully healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III - The Capital City
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	At the restaurant when it's closing time.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	As you may know, the nose is not torn apart but divided into two large and sovereign parts or one of those somewhat veiled areas, with only two bones, while the part that remains is cartilaginamoius and it's not split up, nor does it happen to it except for twisting and curvature.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	In the event that one of your two ears is torn or severely damnified, within four weeks from when you inform us about this injury, and also provide a photograph showing the extent of damage to the earlobe, we will replace it with an artificial ear of similar shape and size.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	E shall assist you with the water issue, and be mindful not to cause any problems for your work on combating those illnesses.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the superior portion of the nose and it does not deviate towards that side, then within a few hours you should expect swelling at the end of the bone where the injury occurred.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the break is in two pieces, it looks like a hinge (or joint).
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	On the first day of your injury, if possible, I will try to restore you some peace and relaxation; otherwise, within 7 or 12 hours, take this rest from the inflammation.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	"A foreign object enters the distal end of your nose from a torn drape, if the fracture is in one piece, or both pieces, place as much weight on that side as possible without causing discomfort."
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	For five days, I have been visiting ancient restaurants where the chairs are covered in leather and changed every day, but to my surprise, they're not what I see; perhaps the mahogany is stored in an album of wood compote with a polish of molassamo; and let her choose which one enters that its core stays firm and hardened like cartilage.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	The following is a translation of the Latin text into English: "A few coins are placed in your nose, at the place called Calgula; penalty more than you covered with lion'cuirassé; and if it breaks through your nose vigorously, and if the illness is not prohibited from respiration."
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you and whether you wish to do so or not, that's up to you.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you have a different type of rash or burn on your nose, apply an antibiamoius cream (such as hydrocortisone) to the affected area and keep it covered with a clean bandage in cool water until it heals.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	Mays si no acicies apostema la hore ce que emplastres aquel drap au farina de sizami i el polvera de nassos cofitz amb l'album de foces; i en aparèix sobre lu stopa del leó, i no es lies les nas per altra causa.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of your nose are slightly fractured or severely crushed, you should have them separated over those, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for this purpose; then proceed to stop the bleeding, and treat the area with a warm compress and healing ointments as needed.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	It has been decided that we will address the problem of plague in our nations, hence it is crucial to ensure that everyone has access to this valuable medication and receives intravenous tubes made of lead as soon as possible for total healing.
Capitol .iiii.	Section IV: The Capitol Building
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Jaw surgery for the fractured mandible repair.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible is broken and the jaw fracture is not displawed, observe if the fracture protrudes slightly and is curved towards one side, hours later its sensation is vague.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Indeed, if the fracture is on the right side (right mandible), you should insert your left index finger into the mouth towards the discomfort; similarly, if the fracte is on the left side (left mandible), then use your right index finger from that direction. Gently push outwards to help separate the broken parts of the bone, while using the other hand for support outside of the affected area. Proceed carefully and gently throughout this process.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone fracture is separated into two parts, you should administer extension for each part as soon as possible within a reasonable time frame to ensure proper healing.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	He decided to disrupt the common practice of using dental amalgam fillings; now I use gold or silver alloy or even ceramic ones; and carefully place pressure on the broken jawbone fracture, and then gently apply it on a double-layered bandage that is not neatly made but just as long as the mandible (lower jaw); and according to how you have adjusted your ligature and where it fits, make sure it doesn't get destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	C commands the servant to rest and relax, taking a break from his greedy lions' feasting.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	She seems that already the figure has been altered in some way; on the third day, you will notice it and then correct what is already changed from its original form by restoring that of flour, wheat meal or chickpea flamenco, so that you have again the complete robe, and place upon her plastered lambskin.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	Therefore the attachment remains intact and the position of the bone is not altered, apart from that, which does not allow entry unless it is sane and strengthens the fracture; in many cases this fracture heals within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If a wound is re-infected or the abscess has not healed after repeated washings with warm water as recommended earlier and it has been resolved, continue to cleanse the area with warm water until fully healed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is a plague, then hours consider if it's a piece of bone separated or segmented, you should subtly determine those segments in accordance with where they belong in relation to the surrounding structures.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	In case of a narrow flood threat, you should increase the hours of your sandbag deployment according to your needs.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And thou shalt no longer have those troubles, nor shall they be left behind by you forever; rather, rest on one of the starry bodies that suit your purpose and embody what is needed within them to heal.
Capitol .v.	In the context of government, a "capital" refers to the city or town that serves as the seat of government for a country or state. This is where the main government offices are located, and it often hosts important political buildings such as the legislature (parliament or congress), executive residence (such as the presidential palace), supreme court, and sometimes even embassies from other countries. Examples include Washington D.C. for the United States, London for the United Kingdom, and Canberra for Australia. Capitals are usually selected based on strategic locations such as political centrality, historical significance, or geographical accessibility.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	At the restaurant, the chicken'cuadril is served fried.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Broken wings are cracked at the joint of departure; beneath it lies the muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	"The object is broken into two parts that do not come together again; it is separated in two pieces and does not easily reunite; or the breakage occurs frequently, making its repair difficult; or the fracture acts as a hindrance."
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	The operation in this case, when the bone is fractured, requires that you be present with two assistants; one should have a traction splint and follow the broken clavicle, while the other extends the neck to the affected area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	A proper alignment is essential when dealing with bone fractures to ensure that they heal correctly and without complications. The following are the key points for ensamble in this context:
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If you are indisposed for several days, take breaks when necessary to rest your weary soul from the burden of cloth or wool; its grandeur should be in accordance with the amount of necessity required; extend and elevate the fork (furcula), but curve the spoon towards yourself so that it balances according to weight.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot aim the end of the furcula outside the field, when it is time for the pain to be reversed upon its source, and pause on his muscle a mild kick in greatness.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	E shall minister unto you the muscle of your left arm between which lies the bone of the furcula (wishbone) being elevated that it is under the rib cage in front, and thereafter thou shalt rectify the fracture and make it even as thy two thumbs do.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	I feel the urge to scratch my shoulders and relieve that itchiness; now I try to stretch my arms out as much as possible to alleviate those annoying sensations.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, then for a while your clever knack of using tools will come to one of those cutters which you have prepared there and so you had left behind the sturdy stem that serves as its handle; and this stem is made of wood or iron, with the following shape: (Translation from Catalan)
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	C is similar to the quill of which this curvature refers; and its breadth should be according to what you need it for, depending on the size of your hand or the scarcity thereof.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of Luzia according to its possible appearance at the operation is such that it has two extremities as often as times and one extremity wide while the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the removal of the tumor is extensive when you have extracted the entire mass and are sure to avoid infection, then stitch up the wound using suture material at this time.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the disruption is small or you fear an abscess, use your time to clean and dress the wound according to the amount of bleeding from the injury.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	As a result of the apothecary's error with the prescription, there were several hours when I took too many red and blue tablets together, followed by a period of rest on that day.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	The precise location of the bone's crack and section is that you should apply a plaster made of wheat flour and albumen from egg whites, then place it on the lion-shaped form and wrap it around the previously mentioned area if needed, so as to securely cover it. This technique was reportedly used by the Saracens in ancient times with their characteristic long length (approximately one palm or near that measure). Furthermore, you should apply a double layer of fine dust over the plaster; and then take a slender piece of tablet whose thickness is about three fingers wide and roughly similar in length. Envelop this tablet within a cloth, and wrap it around both the plaster and the tablet atop the site of fracture; afterwards, apply the bandage as you would with regular wrapping, circling over the neck (or head) and encircling twice around the area needing treatment, ensuring complete coverage. Repeat this process until there are no further visible signs of cracking at the fracture site.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	E also, if it is not improper that the star be covered by the broken bone; and for such cases where you see illness each day, when the lamentation has been softened or you notice the star once more shining brightly, then you shall rectify this and strengthen the bond.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	A brief pause from the discomfort on his neck while he sleeps, and leaves behind traces of him to sleep there for a little cozy spot; so that it is elevated by its helper in relation to that (position), and hence the fracture of the furcula rises with the elevation of the muscle; or his arm is connected to that neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	"E should not be overlooked if it does not heal within twelve days or becomes an ulcer or abscess."
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	The surgeon revised the emplastre (cast) if he saw any swelling at the water site, and adjusted in the straitjacket (immobilizer), ensuring it was restored within which the break of the furcula (wishbone) had been repaired and set.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	E is strict and comfortable according to the standards of twenty-eight days ago, and occasionally stays in guest houses as needed during that time period.
Capitol .vi.	The word you provided, "Capitol," can have a few different meannagings depending on the context in which it's used. Here are some of the most common ones:
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Shoulder fracture fixation surgery.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	Spoon-tart is cracked in the place of "you and not torn by you but only its edges."
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	Then, as for your question, when the place is broken - and it's also broken in its middle part - and not known except by touching, these days according to the shape of the fracture you shall open it up completely and reduce that according to its natural figure in every possible way.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Firstly, pour faire une crème brûlée, procurez les ingrédients suivants :
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Mays discovered the concave shape in one of the locations on the spatula; hence now you must match that curvature to the outline of the lion'amoq peck, and then move the stone accordingly towards equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Article 15 - The strength of the State is based on human dignity, which requires respect for every person within its jurisdiction without discrimination and adherence to the principles of democratic co-existence.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Every day, E considers the railing; and every time it becomes weakened, he replaces it with another one and tightens up both ends if it is located in his place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	E Jaguar feels a sense of anger towards their spouse.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored in XX days or less (XX/25th).
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Therefore, to determine the nature of this number, divide it by its hours and know securely that which those bones begin with are not afraid nor dissolved in them.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	The English translation of the text is as follows: "If there are pusses on the bone or in the joint, then scrape it off now and place it there, and follow what has been said in the breakage of the furcula of saddler's apostema if this happens here."
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII: The Capital City and Its Institutions
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Restoration of the Pietz's fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Some vegetables ripen in the middle of their location and area, while others have ends that spread outwards (e.g., carrots) or are branched and divided into sections (e.n., artichokes).
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	His injuries from when he broke his leg result in declining physical activities and experiencing severe pain, difficulty walking, coughing, vomiting blood, and the fracture is visible within the bone cavity.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the bone is that it should be rotated on its axis and placed between the shoulders with a chisel; then carefully pressing onto the muscles and adjusting the back as much as two vertebrae, subtly performing the operation according to all possible means and in such a way that it returns to its original shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Gently wrap the glue and straw around the slender reed of willow or hazel, making it look as if by levitation; then you cover that with a cloth so delicately woven that it does not break when pulled too hard. Proceed to wind the lacing gently following the curvature of your back for several turns, and tighten that neatly. Always consider the tension of the lacing at all times, making sure it's sufficiently flexible yet secure.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to remove the dressing or plaster on that wound due to corruption, suppuration, pain, or swelling at the site, causing discomfort and looseness of the bandage, as well as eliminating any matter by appropriate cleansing with a washcloth for healing purposes; and then reduce the dressing, if needed several times throughout the face; and adjust it to the tightness within which it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII: The British Parliamentary System
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	At the coastal restoration, how many sections are being fixed?
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You must know that fractures of the ribs are not in cuts, but in large holes; and from the ends of them, on their front side, do not run towards those injuries to such extent as is carpunculous (carbuncle-like).
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	I know of you is not a threat, so there's nothing to worry about. Everything will be okay.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The surgery should be as painless as possible and the fracture fixed according to the most appropriate method, within which it is immobilized properly based on its condition, and then applied cast or support for the broken bone, if required.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the coast bone fracture is declining towards the fingers, it causes intense pain and puncturing sensation so sharp that even if one has cried out, they feel as though their very bones are pierced; also causing difficulty in movement of limbs, coughing, and vomiting with blood; this condition is difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The Ancients built incredible structures to ward off the elements.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	E de lor so that says: cover the table with food from which you shall fast in order to cure the disease I have caused - inflammamo and winds of illness, so that your stomach may be filled and extended, and the fracture driven out.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We must keep our eyes open to the water in order to prevent it from becoming a trivial cause of an abscess, or if it does occur, to help alleeby with water as soon as possible.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They gave thanks to God that the storm had passed and they could now rest safely in their shelter; yet there was also fear that the strong wind might cause flooding due to weakened structures.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Here are some rules for its use: Whoever the location is, covered with wool that was previously submerged in oil and dust particles between the shores within which it is filled, that the envelope be as large as possible when wrapping around what surrounds it; and to care for any illnesses related to pleurisy using food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	English: With great effort and strong determination, they cause an unbearable pain to the wound that had not been suffered before; then immediately puncture it, fearing over the injury as hours pass, hoping that a fissure will open on the site, revealing from the jagged coastline, and quickly extract that instrument which is conserved in memory of the previous one, and which they easily incise through the bone.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Aproximadamente, certifique-se de que ajuste as luvas da pálpebra se ela for grande, com delicadeza, e cubra isso com um curativo até que esteja cicatrizado.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you get an ingrown toenail, the pain can become severe and pus may form under the skin near the nail. To treat this condition, ensure that the affected area is cleaned with antiseptic solution and apply warm compresses to help reduce swelling and discomfort. You should also consult a doctor for proper treatment of the infection caused by the ingrown toenail.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	A is above the layers upon which it sleeps, within which it must be healed.
Capitol .ix.	IX Capital, often stylized as CAPITAL.IX, is a London-based investment bank and financial services company that was founded in the United Kingdom. It provides various financial solutions to corporate clients such as mergers and acquiscuits advisory, capital markets, debt financing, risk management, restructuring, and other related services. As a prominent player within the global financial industry, CAPITAL.IX operates with professionalism, expertise, and integrity.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Repair of a lumbar spinal fracture and the second cervical vertebrae.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some hernias in the abdomnental wall occur as a result of trauma to the rib cage and similarly affect the intervertebral discs of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	If the wound is not infected and appears to be healing fine, you may consider these factors to determine if it will fully recover or not; how many times in the past your similar injuries have become more inflamed and led to severe complications or even death, and if you cannot prevent such outcomes nor expand them. Also, when you feel pain upon touching with a needle, there is no sign of healing. Know that this could be a mortal condition in the coming days.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If you have those warts and they are causing you discomfort, here's what you can do to try and get rid of them:
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you want to know if the fish looks fresh and its weight is relevant in determcriing whether it's healthy or not, there are a few things you can do:
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you fall ill and your condition worsens, seek those whom it happens upon most frequently, and as soon as possible consult with them regarding your own health issues. They will provide guidance based on their expertise, and sometimes they may even require you to lie down while urinaturally struggling but unable to pass water. Remember that these situations can be life-threatening, so do not delay seeking appropriate medical care.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If Maynard does not settle any of those causes, the cause is better and more plausible.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment for this condition is to apply cold compresses over the affected spondylitis or inflamed joint, or alternating with warm baths; place the cold compress on that area every day until the swelling subsides.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	In these hours of pause, one finds comfort and existence, and strength overcomes him as he lies there; and he commands the pain to rest and be tranquil, not sleeping upon the departure from which torment arises if it is within that healing occurs.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	Ese se decide vendrá detrás del hueso sagital o alguna causa que ya ha sido separada de él, las horas cubiertas sobre la costilla e introducir aquel os; y apretamente ata los dientes de la pared, si es grande, el engrase con ungüento carnoso entero cuando esté sanado.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	Mays is torn off the last tooth of his jaw, and she's the only one left in the set, now take that little piece from her with your right hand into its butt, and join it together as closely as possible for a second time; if you need glue or filler, apply some on top of it, and strengthen the tooth.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	Yes, I feel like my heart is torn apart in this light, those hours you've left me with her, and your presence here, and the healing of the pain that comes before which has been cured.
Capitol .x.	Capital, in the context of governance and geography, refers to a city or town that serves as the seat of government for a country, state, province, or other administrative region. The capital is usually where the central offices of the government are located, including the legislature, executive branch, and often the judiciatury.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Restoration of the wide bridge.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anchovy's tail are often broken, and if they break, the hours of that fracture do not occur separately at the ends but continue into the length and incline towards the parts divided; and lead to a wicked pain in its place, accompanied by puncturing and stupefaction when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The translation of the sentence "Ela restauração da luz é que tu estendas a tua mão sobre o local que está sobre a fratura, qual é a figura dela?" to English is:
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	C se fractura está en el mismo lugar que lo ha hecho anterioreramente, horas después vuelve a parecerse al original una vez que esté equilibrado y ensamblado de nuevo con su forma natural.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in your long bones or you decline further medical treatments for such injuries, hours ago you should seek out the nearest healthcare provider who can prepare to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	Thus, when applying the adhesive onto that surface, pause to allow it to set before placing pressure on either wood stick or wooden dowel, and reinforce per seam for added strength where there is no risk of cracking nor movement in the joint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	The translation of the Catalan text into English is as follows: "The pain in your mouth that extends beyond where it touches the constriction according to equality, and commands the evil one to lie on his back or lift up his side." This sentence seems to describe a medical condition related to dental issues.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Mays (Meanwhile), if you decide to stop the bleeding of an external wound, cease the application of pressure and restoration until the bleeding is stopped, then wait for a while with the water on it as described in section 2; afterwards return to restoring the area, strengthening it just as before.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If the items are outdated or damaged, you have the right to return them. Please contact us for a refund or exchange within our return policy period.
Capitol .xi.	The English translation for the Latin phrase "Capitolium" is "Capitol". In ancient Rome, the term referred to a temple dedicated to Jupiter Optimus Maximus on the Capitoline Hill - one of the Seven Hills of Rome. It was considered one of the most important and sacred temples in Roman religion and played significant roles throughout history as both a religious center and an emblem of the city's power and influence.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Restoration of the adductor muscle fracture recovery.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Assistant: It appears to be a phrase in Catalan, and it roughly translamoes to "Help me with the water that is between my left shoulder and neck." However, without more context, I'm unable to provide further assistance on this topic. Could you please clarify your request or ask another question?
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If the line is broken, you restore its hours in one of two methods. Which one should you choose first according to this information?
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	The severe weather conditions of the two locations have caused them to be closed down, and their high altitude has led to further suspension.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Follow the defects over a sectional beam; and insert your broken arm through the end that reaches to the tip of the member wherein is attached the curved portion of the shaft.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Lay the bandage over that painful wound, extend the mixture to the edges of it; then apply a firm pressure on the fracture with your hands, while keeping them steady until the fracture sets according to its nature.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other maneuver is that the malady shall be resupplied over its own back and suspended by the hand of him who is on the left; and he commands to two ministers, one holding water from above the fracture at his hands, and the other holds the remaining part below; and whichever side they extend it.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish to strengthen the extension, hours upon your struggle with the crack and its opposite side, and as long as both ministers extend to their respective halves.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	If the fracture is close to the end of the bone, then we should immobilize the entire limb above and below the injury site until the swelling subsides and wait for further instructions regarding treatment of the fracture itself.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	If the fracture is caused by an accident, the hours covered will depend on that location and that accident.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Clean the wound properly and apply it according to how deep and how often it's applied for proper application; this will prevent infection from occurratur without causing further harm.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Mays decides to have an acupuncture session for his chronic back pain on the sixth day, and notices that within two weeks, there is a noticeable reduction in tension and pain while performing daily activities like walking and bending over. After four weeks of continued treatment, he experiences complete relief from his condition.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	Firstly, you will need to place the cast in such a way that it rests over the fracture, and then wrap a waterproof dressing or cover around the cast; next, adjust the arm using an adjacent splint, and finally, position your free hand over the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Rest period allows the drape to be put over the supports so that your arm is in a stable position; this prevents any accidental breaking of the glass due to movement or other reasons.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	In the morning, she uses a pair of eyeglassnits/glasses.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	E is a rule that you must pause over the fracture of the stele which may be placed and put beside other steles; and you must place between each stele the width of the former, and the length of the steles should correspond with the breaking according to an addition by three digits on either side.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Apropos of the strong emphasis on the stones as per the initial framework I mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, it is important to discuss the significant role they play throughout history and their cultural relevance. From ancient civilizations carving intricate symbols onto these monolithic structures, to modern societies erecting memorials or monuments for remembrance, stones have always served as a testament to human achievements and legacies.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	It is important that the site of the fracture be kept clean and dry to prevent infection.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	The canal is more elongated than the stricture minor.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Therefore, if you wish to replicate the situation of the stones and adhere strictly as we have described in this hour when restoring its original position, then do so now.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear an abscess, within seven hours you must have the necessary drainage and antibiotpert treatment by day VII as we've instructed.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Article E, on allotted three days for transport to avoid accumulation at the point of production or inflammation; and it is prohibited to supply foodstuffs in excess as a measure against surplus, hence adjust accordingly as previously mentioned.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you have signed an arbitration agreement that does not provide for any exclusion of cause, then the statute of limitations shall not be dismissed but rather extended by three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	B è afflitto dal malessere sul suo petto e i suoi sintomi sono nel suo stomaco.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	During a pause at the full dining table of woolen disarray, reflect on all hours of day or night that are not sleepy nor dissolved in thought; if your figure is fragmented, or soothed by lamentation, thusly rectify it fully with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Pause the food order according to which we have before mentioned, unless the food is subtle in the appetizer course during which it is consumed slowly; henceforth, the heavier dishes should be served afterwards.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The common remedy for a sprain and the injury of one's leg is that they be bandaged tightly within twelve days; and it is advised that they are to be rested, bathed, and treated with ointments which correct this condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is an open type (compound), do not delay treatment and seek medical attention within hours or preferably within two months for optimal healing outcomes.
Capitol .xii.	The English term for "Capitol" is simply "Capitol." It refers to a building in which a legislative body meets, such as the United States Capitol where Congress convenes in Washington D.C. This term is derived from Latin and means 'the place of assembly'. In summary, there's no need for an alternative translation; "Capitol" remains the same in English.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Postoperative care after humerus (upper arm) fracture surgery.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Brace is composed of two bones which are called two forks; one of them is small and that'amoù the said branch grows from it, and the other is large and that's where it's grafted above the smaller one, on the farther side.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	The great lighthouse has only been partially damaged, while the smaller one has suffered extensive damage.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small lamp is broken, repairing it soon after may be somewhat difficult, and restoring its health is even more challengamoùs.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	The left eye is cut off from the light due to a bad fracture, and its recovery is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	A lot of malaria cases result in fractured bones due to severe complications.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	If the bone that is broken is above the ankle joint, it may be best to see a doctor for treatment, as you may need rest and support until it has healed sufficiently.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	The well-known fountain is more active than the tamed one, it flows with greater intensity and force.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If both foci are coincidental touchpoints, then the hyperbola degenerates into a straight line with zero curvature.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	In English, the blessing from the priest could be translated as follows: "May peace descend upon you and envelop you, may your hands rest by your sides, and may all other limbs follow suit, while this ear stays lower than the others mentioned, and let illness fall away like a fallen feather."
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	"May the heavens above us grant that evil does not prevail over good."
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	The minister extends the hand of peace from both sides as he gives his speech, while another minister joins in a similar gesture.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	A proper match to the original phrase "elegantly embroider the oysters on that plate in the best way possible" would be:
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	C1: In the bill of your services provided, please provide all relevant information in its proper place at your convenience.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	Sì appare in lu satul separat che punhe la codană și nu e a ta speranța în restabilirea acestuia; această dată, tu fii supra lucului și osta cea de sus conform mâncerile pe care am spus-o.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is a simple one, I have already done some watercolor paintings, so now I'll take care of that (patient).
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you get an abscess at the time of your meal in your restaurant, take off your apron and quickly make a cream of olive oil and white wax; mix it well between smoothness and subtlety, then spread it gently over the delicate area where the abscess is located. Afterwards, remove the cerot (a type of poultice) you have prepared with polverara flour mixed with olive oil paste, and apply a patch made from this mixture; place this bandage firmly but not too tight on that wound, ens cuidado de no ser demasiado apretado.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	The names of the stone slabs from the Bronze Age that you see in major sites are either a breakage into one or two fragments together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Apart from the area of the fracture that is strong and vehemently affected, and whenever it extends to parts outside the fracture or to lower parts of it, loosen the restriction a bit more if it precedes in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that enfold your fracture should be soft and smooth fabrics, and the bandage'cued by a rope or cord shall have the right balance between fineness and thickness, as we have previously stated.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	E considers the members el·liberal approach to days. (Translation note: The original phrase seems to contain typographical errors or be in Catalan, which I've translated into English.)
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If any cause arises that requires correction, thus proceed as with the injury to which this applies; then wrap the member in water so that it ceases after that pain has subsided.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	She lets the member out of its restraint and returns to her previous state.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the scripture is mellowed and the ox has been refreshed and there are similarities with those, then restore all of that to your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	E also considers if the nutrient is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive strictures, as in cases where one seeks to allefly that nutrient by small and easy means within days when it flows to such member, and accordingly strengthens that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If Maynard is not responsible for any of the reasons stated earlier, he shall not be held liable within twenty-four hours or thereafter.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	A proper support is suspended to alleviate the pain from its agitated movements, and it allows that to sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	This cast will be removed in thirty days or in thirty-two days, depending on the complexity and circumstances of your case, and all according to the advice of the physician.
Capitol .xiii.	Title: A Tale of Two Cities - Part XIII: The Dawn of Hope
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Post-operative care for scaphoid fracture and tendon repair.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Oh, that the pins of your mother's knee and the joints of her fingers would break apart, but do not harm them; only allow some mild discomfort to persist for a while.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	Evan accidentally broke the glass or dropped it; he soon realized that the mistake followed him everywhere according to equality, and promptly picked up the shattered pieces from where they lay spread out.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	The minister shall extend the offered services and appoint equivalent healthcare professionals within those that are qualified to establish a proper connection.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	In the event of small cuts or grazes, wash with soap and water to cleanse thoroughly. If you are prone to infection, apply an antiseptic cream as a precautionary measure; then wrap the wound securely using sterile gauze or bandages depending on the size of the affected area, enspectively cover it with a dressing for protection.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	The Mays's trickery is in the cards of deceit; then he pretends to seek shelter under the drape, and commands the villain to raise that with his clenched hand palm long.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	E is the chair with a curved back upon which one can sit while lifted, ensuring that the body remains supported by the palms; and strengthen it according to cover.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the crack is outside of the parcel boundaries, he shall measure and determine how many days it has been in existence on one side or another of the parted area within the palm; so that the owner may be open and straight; and accordingly place the boundary marker, as such when turned around between the said lines.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	E is decided to crack open one of the nuts you've chosen, then hold it between your palms and apply pressure accordingly until the shell cracks, making sure not to damage the kernel inside. If desired, you can use a nutcracker or hammer for smaller kernels, enscribing a small vertical line on the shell beforehand.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Mays if the fracture is in other places they say, as it is in that of the thumb, or index, or earlobe (auricle), or ring finger, then its movement and rotation are limited just like with the one we mentioned earlier; or all movements should be continuous, which is better; or a small pause on that bone joint, as we have said before.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	In your restaurant, how do you handle and prevent cross-contamination to ensure the safety of your operations? According to guidelnaces mentioned earlier, could you describe your procedures in this regard?
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV - The Role of the Capital City in National Governance
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	In the context of a skull fracture repair, it typically refers to surgical intervention or treatment required to fix and stabilize a broken bone in the human cranium (skull). This process might involve techniques such as using plates, screws, wires, or external fixation devices depending on the type of fracture.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the cuayza motas were broken and it was declared that he felt according to what converted him into leaving in front and to the supreme authority.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The healing of Luke involves placing the lambent (shining) above the fracture and another piece beneath it; the evil is laid upon his belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The Minister extends the entire allowance according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Mays was about to fall prey to the wiles of the fox, when she suddenly propelled herself away from the den towards the opening of the penthouse, thus extending her case within reach, and leaving behind the broken limb.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the cutting is granted to the defendant, then it shall be done on behalf of the defendant and will extend to all related parties.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	The surgeon should join the ends of both his own femurs in such a way that they appear naturally aligned and fuse together properly through good fusion; subsequently, you should apply plaster casts or bandages to avoid post-operative inflammation of the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If you get stung by a bee, apply a cold compress to the affected area immediately and keep it there for at least two days until the swelling subsides, then return to your normal routine.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The application of Russian dressing for the fracture consists in wrapping it with a hard bandage, folding that two or three times, and trimming any excess; then wrap it around to encompamoes both the cast and its contour.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	A long iron rod is inserted between the chessboard and the table next to the knight's side, with its extremities reaching the borders of both sides from sovereign parts. It rotates around the table and chessboard when it exceeds the boundary.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	A prop of the hare on the site of that cracked stone, and placed those one star upon the bones of the chest.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Fill the bottles with warm water between the chest and the waist belt, to ensure that it is properly compressed.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	A proper care involves the application of a firm bandage over the site of the fracture within three to four layers, and as you move away from the location of the fracture, your compression should be lighter and less moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Article IV. Extension of Doors and Stiles within the Fields between which it Comes to Lie, and Strengthening Both Sides of the Rails on Either Part So That the Leverage is not Lost from Their Respective Places: It shall be permitted for any person or persons owning adjoining fields to extend their doors and stiles across such fields so that they lie within said fields between which it comes to pass, ensuring both sides of the rails on either part are strengthened. The leverage should not be lost from their respective places as long as this extension does not encroach upon private property or violate any established boundaries.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Section 5 - Prohibition on Applying Hazardous Substances to the Skin or Body Parts Resembling Those Enumerated in Schedule I
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If you have an injury or condition of the bone, such as a fracture, consult your doctor so that they can refer you to a specialist as soon as possible; if not, seek out and obtain medical attention immediately, and follow any advice given regarding care for the affected area until it has healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some splints are used to immobilize this ankle fracture while it heals; they should be adjusted to fit the shoe, as we have mentioned in the previous section and with the help of a brace.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of this limb in such manner made, it should not lead to a chronic impairment; and if it is restored alone, another water that is applied to the other joint, at times it becomes necessary for the one which was previously affected to also become impaired.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	Sapiens that the cow-hide is cured in XL days or a little less or a little more, and all depends on the variety of circumstances and other factors.
Capitol .xv.	The United States Capitol, located in Washington D.C., serves as the home of the U.S. Congress and is an iconic symbol of American democracy. Inaugurated in 1800 and completed in its current form after a fire in 1857, it has witnessed numerous historical events throughout its existence. The Capitol building stands atop Capitol Hill and houses the Senate and House of Representatives chambers where important legislation is debated and passed. Its neoclassical design reflects influences from ancient Rome and Greece, embodying ideals such as democracy, citizenship, and governance that have been central to American history.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Repair of the Denolh's scaphoid fracture
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	I know that the broken shield of your ancestor has brought misfortune upon you, but now it rises to new heights through wise decisions.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Mays seems to have broken his arm, but it's only a crack or strain in the muscles, and that is nothing more than a minor injury, and all of this leads to a feeling of concern.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the water supply shall be undertaken as quickly as possible, such that it is replenished in accordance with the quantities demanded by individuals to whom it has been discontincuously supplied and subsequently added together following what is fair, convenient, and feasible for efficiency and ease of construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then bend your arm towards the round stone, if you desire that one; and strain with all the strength suitable to the water'prise.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Article E proposes to consider all the injuries mentioned in other sections, as well as those similar to an abscess or such that appear due to any incident where it is appropriate and beneficial within the scope of healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Title: Capital City XVI - The Heartbeat of the Nation
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Bone grafting in the treatment of tibia fracture healing.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You should know that in the basket there are two bones of which one is large and is called "the handle" of the basket; and the other is small and is called "the spine."
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	Accidents causing a series of bone fractures in the arm and broken bones are treated by making such restorations as those done for arm fracture repair; thus, the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If S is divided by two or more parts at once, the barrel becomes completely separated into all those parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	Sei che se il gioco del poker è stato sconfitto, il banco viene trasformato in punti perduti.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If the old bones are too thick, you reap what's left of them, and it's because of those reasons that aren't to your liking.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Amendments and extensions shall be made in accordance with the same principles of fairness and equality as outlined herein.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, although the cliff of Cove is rocky and steep with many obstacles, I extend to you a gentle and less burdenscued assistance, acknowledging your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the field of work, every cause involving your arm requires a complete assessment before taking any action. Remove all splinters from wood that are protruding and causing pain; this is especially important for large pieces such as those found in palm fronds. Remove them according to the length of the area being treated based on the size of the affected part, without including uninjured areas or parts far removed from the site of injury.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Wrap around each drape on both wraps according to their length and pause one end of the wrap over the edge from one half to the other half, ensuring they meet at a lower point on the pole.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	A is anchored at three points of the extremities and also in the middle, so this structure cannot lean to the right or left, and remains stable.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	He is administering a series of treatments according to the length of the chain; and it stays with him in order for him to maintain its activity.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	In English: "A majority of the rocks that you find in a fault zone are actually associated with earthquakes."
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Aprop, consider each day the change and study that occurs in your subject for further studies, and you guard them from inflammamo and other similar causes; and if any cause of those arises, at once take him to a safe place where he can rest until he recovers.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII: The Importance of the Capital City
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	The foot and the bones of the hand have a variety of names in different languages, often derived from Latin or Old English roots. Here are some examples:
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	In the ankle, there is no accidental fracture of the entire foot; only some bones of the leg may have accidental fractures that are repeated; and in cases where there are few accidents, a trimalleolar fracture occurs without exception.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	In the original text, which appears to be written in a medieval Occitan language (also known as Old Provençal), it seems to describe a scenario where someone breaks their leg and then lies on the ground. The English translation would be: "If one's foot bone is broken and those bones are raised above themselves between them, soon the pain causes his foot to lie upon the earth just like an ant."
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	A prop betingelas the one spot that is higher of those bones, and gently press on it, then twist until they turn in their joints.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	A prop open space and stopping short, with an additional table between two chairs.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	"The strain of that arm extension is decreasing as you have wrapped it with a bandage and other measures from which you benefit."
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	After three or four days have passed, you will be able to remove the casts, as you may find the bones healed, fractured, or dislocated, and performing surgery on those would thus require such caution.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	May you grant us the strength to carry on, help restore what has been lost, and make things as they were when you restored them, so may I also tell of your restoration in the newsletter.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	A proper pause after the truncated statement according to its length, and it is wider at the top; and shortly afterwards on this table which has been outlined, there's a small structure depicted with an upright posture.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	Mays should ensure that their triceps are stretched properly in two to three sets or more during their workout routine, focusing on each movement with proper form and technique. They can then strengthen the lower part of the spine by placing a barbell over it while lying face down on an exercise bench, holding onto the ends of the barbell for support. This will help engage the entire back muscles effectively during exercises like deadlifts or rows.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	E is also convenient for you not to forget that in the other types of fractures from the accidents we have mentioned, all causes are not considered; however, it applies to any accident involving impacts.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII - The Legislative Process in the Capital
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Fracture of the female pelvis, pubic bone and man's spine vertebrae.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	Once the woman's veil is lifted, her face will stop blushing for a while and she slightly inclines towards the direction of his departure, then stands behind him.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	The old woman plunged her hand into the mouth of the pot and felt around as she hoped; then she approached the girl, who was frightened, and raised her head little by little until it was completely outside that part of the mouth where the skull had been so tightly crushed.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Here is the translation of your text to English:
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	After seven days or so, the environment around that area will be restored to its original state.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you want, take once again the bladder of an ox and stretch it over the trunk of a tree; then insert the entire bladero into its hollow part, and using a reed tube, blow air inside until the bladder is inflated within the tree's hollow, so that the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	A full pardon shall be granted for the offense and you will remain in custody until such time as your sentence is completed upon which being so released.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	The pedal bone of a male or female horse is trimmed, and its material is used in the restoration and shaping of other objects that have been requested for the animal's hoof.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	The water that is right shall not be hidden in these deep chasms and that hardly emerge, mainly to that one whose study and use and understanding are my free motive; for this fracture represents you in the greatest legal actions in your restoration and in its strictness, and therefore entrust them.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	Place the goose's beak in the home where it is pinched, tie its wings with a rope or string, and then put the beak into that; then wrap it up in fabric or cloth, and let it stay wrapped for three days or until recovery, allowing it to heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX: The United States Capitol Building
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Bone healing in a cast after a fracture.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to use an instrument similar to the one that causes fracture of a plaster, especially if the bone is large just like the ones in the skull or limb, so it can be called and flew-botomized immediately if the conditions for bleeding control you have as we mentioned above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the rain falls on dry soil and it is within your power to retain this liquid until you sprinkle it over its thirsty roots (assuming that there are no other causes preventing it).
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	A) Start the wound healing process that day and do not continue if you develop an abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	Mays si acidesco un ascesso, cerca di sgonfiarlo entro al giorno seguente, quando l'ascesso sia guarito, e non avvicinarti ad esso nei giorni terzi o quarti, in quanto ti farà incorrere in ulteriori malattie.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If you break your arm and it becomes visible above the elbow sleeve that you wear to work, then at times try to reduce this exposure and adjust it as best as possible with the least effort.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Mays, which is not a part of your equipment and the equality of light from the two stars (sun and moon), the hours you reduce in that direction toward those two stars; and it is an instrument made of iron, its length is either seven or eight digits long, and its width according to the amount of plague. And for this reason, it is necessary for a doctor to choose from these three or four instruments (referring to the hourglasses) depending on the quantity required in treatment during all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	S be fair, and let it not cost less than what is due; you shall make an appropriate purchase at the time of the transaction.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Article A is of acute extremity at which the margins in its extremities are aligned; and it tends to be greatly curved towards the greatest length within the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	Yes, this is the form of "lu":
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	In Greek, "λαμπρή ατέλειωτη παυχά" translates to "brightly unending boasting." However, your statement appears to be a mix of languages and may not make complete sense in English. If you're asking whether the phrase has a clear meaning or interpretation when translated to English, it would depend on context as these words can have different meanamoes based on their usage.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	The tip of the hearing aid is paused above the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	In a small meadow there is an apple tree that grows apples of equal size.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Hence you shall attempt to align the ends of the fracture together and if the broken end is subtle and does not accept that instrument properly, then you should enclose the bone'nourished with an iron splint or a suitable device for such purpose. This instruction in Old Catalan pertains to treating bone fractures by applying appropriate medical devices like splints during the historical period when this language was prevalent.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	Mays if you cannot reduce the waste to water that has been repeated, at this time try to dispose of it in any manner possible by which you can safely handle them with precautions we have mentioned; or burn that material in some way using one of the methods available to you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	The one that comes before the rose in terms of delicacy and subtlety is the violet.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	Cum the bone is reduced and placed correctly to alleviate the severe, persistent pain that occurs when the bone does not return to its original position; therefore, you should seek immediate medical attention for this condition.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	The completion of the restoration you have done on your teeth and now submerging them in a white varnish for hours, especially during summer, without pausing over salt water or any other cause that may be harmful to it so that nothing happens like erosion and corroser.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	A. Apply sterile dressings during the time of your complimentary examination, and leave only minor abrasions exposed unless incisions or sutures require specific wrapping according to the amount of wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Take great care not to aggravate the wound of the fracture, for there are cases where even a small fall has caused serious injuries to patients, and such accidents can lead to death or severe disease. Stay safe.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the ulnar nerve is entrapped in a non-compressive stricture that is soft and different from those of other fractures, it may result in a condition known as cubital tunnel syndrome. The treatment approach would be slightly altered, focncially involving conservative measures such as splinting or elbow padding to avoid direct pressure on the nerve during arm movements or sleep. In cases where symptoms persist despite these non-surgical interventions, surgical decompression may still be considered but with less emphasis on fracture stabilization and more focus on addressing the soft stricture that is affecting the ulnar nerve.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	Is the plague is large or is it a bad plastood? And you fear about that accidental event which we have recommended, and you feel pain in the place, for hours do not let you rest on that bed, but rather go to that wrapped up in hard sheets in a place of stalls and strengthen yourself there.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	Ecce! A day or two days from now the rain shall begin to fall again, and it shall be born with your eastward wind, at which time you will have hung over that tree under which we had sheltered; then administer some wine, as is our custom when rain falls - use wines like tetrapharmacist or similar.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Conveneys me to disent the procedure and consider the plague every day at matins and vespers, until it is consolidated and firmly established, and that the member be prepared in such a manner that the poultice runs from it to the lower parts by easy application.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the rain lasts for several days and it is not contained nor separated from you by any barrier, then be aware that you are exposed to the risks of small floods which could cause concern as you try to cross the river.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	E of those injuries that are completely separated from the rest and isolated, those that do not include any limb but cause pain, you should try to incise them according to your ability at that time.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	It seems you're referring to "The Decameron" by Giovanni Boccacpressive, in which the character Griselda is subjected to various forms of mistreatment and deceit by her husband, Gualtieri. This story reflects on themes such as loyalty, endurance through adversity, and the corruption and putrefaction of moral values within society during that time period.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	In the water in which you make your promise and I am present with my wife: When it's well stirred, pour into a large glass container. Like bones of beef or chicken and their juices, as if they were parts of larger limbs; don't assume too much extraction from them nor the removal of any residue for many times can accidently result in death; keep it within limits that one could easily spill by mistake after about 20 to 30 days. And I shall heal the sickness if you are seen, and if not leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Certainaturum XXI.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The curative effects that occur in the residue of a bone fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	The healing of this injury in the remains of bone fracture, especially near the joints, is disturbed by the presence of a foreign body resembling the shape of the limb; it strongly hinders the normal functioning of the limb.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Adonc consideres si l'enflure est récente et inflammatoire; en ce cas, assainissez-la avec des médicaments qui ont stipulé aussi bien c'est le laudanum (opium), que les pansements, etc., ainsi que semblables à ceux-ci. Prenez de cela certaines ou toutes au total; si vous constatez que ces parties sont encore inflammatoires, assèchées par l'alun (ou le sulfate d'aluminium) et aggravées en poudre, posez-les sur la zone enflée dans une étuve et contractez bien ces parties pour un bon maintien.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	In cases where there is a skin injury that has not healed for several days, you should change the dressing and apply another one as soon as it becomes dirty; or reinforce it with an additional layer of plaster, since plaster retains its properties throughout all contact with body parts.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays, who seeks to convert a stone into money and thereby cause the necessity of that thing, shall split it as for higher authority's portion, incise its superfluity and eminence, or reduce it within which is retained; and only if he obtains approval from the relevant authorities.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI: The Capital City of the Union
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	In bone fracture restoration, the Roman's approach to realigning and fixing the delicate and fragile structure of bones does not follow their natural anatomy.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	A bone fracture is treated, and the affected limb remains immobilized and rested for a while: at this time it is not done but for various reasons such as: one of which is excessive pain from the dislocation and ligament laxity that has occurred following surgery; or due to an excessive narrowing of the space between the sutures which prohibits nutrients from reaching the affected lim
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	In the healing power of water is to soothe the pain and make your tender heart within which the wound shall be multiplied, and brings comfort and joy upon you.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	A proper pause of breath allows one to ensure that the food taken in is properly digested and absorption of water into the bloodstream continues, so that the essential nutrients circulate back to their natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Title: "Capitol XXII"
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The restoration of cracked bones when done improperly is forbidden and the operation using water that covers it.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	The member that you've fractured and dislocated is brought back to its normal position in terms of curvature and prominence, thus giving it a more stable form; however, the member does not prevent natural healing processes from occurramo, hence there is no need for words from someone who believes that your fractured limb should be newly set.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	In our region, there are numerous hotels and restaurants that have been established by foreigners; however, this business activity is highly criticized as it may cause significant damage to the local heritage, which is of great importance.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	Mays, si claudicantia et nodosa sunt recentiora, hauris ut aque temperata in qua sit coctae herbae molliforantes; sicut folium alnæ et radix lucae et meliloti et semblantes ad ea quae supra nominantur. Eia pinguus in lu emplastrato tam mollificatio ut diaphanum bene factum, aut quod sit praecisam mucilem radicis alnæ et sua contexitur gallinae grisei vel oleo circario; aut quod sint praeceps figuras crassas et sint tristatae in foeni columbari sicut semblantes ad ea medicinarum qui supra nominaverunt.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some feet may become wet due to persistent friction in the legs; it is advisamo that they be dried thoroughly at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Mays' tortuosity and its anatomy lead to the formation of calcified deposits and its subsequent conversion into stone, necessitating medical attention due to his iron deficiency, often causing more than just partial clogging and ongoing dissolution of bone tissue by subtle insidious water sources that exceed normal levels in areas prone to such occurrences. He requires easy accessibility for regular monitoring and treatment to ensure proper management and care.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII: The Halls of Congress
De sermo en dislocacio.	Topic: Communication and Dislocation (Miscommunication)
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is a displacement of one of the joints in the body, which prevents movement and causes painful symptoms and significant injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When a bone is displaculed or misaligned, it's important to have it reduced as soon as possible and not delayed because if it is late, the area becomes swollen and very wet with fluid, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	There is an increased risk of developing painful cramps and spasms in the affected area during the inflammastoid episode; thus, it's not advisable to strain or overexert yourself at that time.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Mays quan aquo accideys lahoras cove qu'tu te coytas a la flaubotomia del malaltetgna, entro que repauses l’apostema; e repausa l’membras sia embrocat am aguotta cauda e aua, e repausa sia reduczientscha am facilitar.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	E tu to member that the memory will come back when you are near water again.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	In the event of an earthquake, the capitals shall be relocated according to the following order of priorities as stipulated in the agreement; from highest to lowest priority.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIIII (Capitals)
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Management of temporomandibular joint (TMJ) dislocation to the left side.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Dislocated jaws if not treated; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their place by minimal movement, and so softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, between which there is complete dislocation at the joint where saliva leaks due to pain, and that it cannot hold food nor can close its mouth, and the tongue being wrapped in its own speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	In the case of Mays' shoulder dislocation being minor, hours in major displacements can return without much cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the displacement is complete and total, he would advise that it be administered promptly without any delay at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	E is the minister who had taken charge of the illness, and intervened the doctor with his two fingers from one side into the reason for the displacement of the jaw within its mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or that he interposed his two thumbs when the dislocation is on both sides, while the others mentioned by him should be outside in a similar manner; and commands the patient to stop their mandibles and absolve those from any displacement; and the doctor aligns the jaw and pushes it back so that it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	It's difficult to reduce swelling, especially if both mandibular bones are dislocated, as well as providing oxygen and water after the procedure has been done easily on both sides without delaying reduction of either side, which we have already mentioned.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	So let them be returned and equalized again, the mouth of evil is closed and not appeased, for hours peace rests upon those pollen dusts with red hue, it shall be fashioned from wax and fragrant oil; and thus made easy to read in large letters.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	E be the sick person lie on his back with his head between two pillows so that he cannot turn to the right or left; and nothing should prevent him from doing what is necessary at mealtime. As they eat their food, a slice of lean lion'nose (lamb) must be taken within which when pains are diminished and jaws become numb, then one may begin eating with pleasure again.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	The water intake is recommended to be easy and does not require working through the opening of the mouth; instead, drinking and swallowing should be done within which the jawbone has been repaired and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	It is difficult to reduce two dislocated mandibles in any hour and not return them to their original place; then feverish ailments persist with great persistence, and the belly swells greatly from illness, and vomiting occurs as pure cholera does.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	Once upon a time, there was a boy who loved the water very much and spent his days by its edge. He would watch the waves travel to and fro, each wave seeming different than the last. Little did he know that in just two weeks from now, a great storm would come crashing down upon the place where the water met the land, forever changing everything he held dear.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV. The Legislative Process in the Capital
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The reduction of the humeral head displacement and distal end of the biceps muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furculum is not dislocated from the left clavicle due to its continuous attachment to the sternum; and sometimes it becomes dislocated at the beginning towards the outside, as noted by the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The remedy for relieving the pain is that it spreads over one's back and extends to your arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	The wind blows through the open window to your hand and then it returns back again.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Well, let's give that paste and powder some extra strength!
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The extremity of the one who is struck and hears it continues at that, not displawed in any day; hours should be reduced and adjusted according to what has been said and according to how you have prepared yourself.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And pray healing upon that poultice, and powders, and extracts, and command the illness to adhere to tranquility and rest within which it shall be cured.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	In this area, the healing process is reduced when the muscle tissue is separated from its usual site.
Capitol .xxvi.	In the English language, Roman numerals are used to denote chapters in books or sections within legal and official documents. "Capitol" is not a standard term associated with chapter numbers, but let's assume you meant to refer to a specific section or part of an act (perhaps from legislation) that uses the Roman numeral system for organization.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	We know that the "muscle" in question is not completely detached but rather separated in three ways, one of which involves displacement from its origin to insertion point.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second rule is that the shoulder should be dislocated outside of its normal range, and this occurs at the start; it's not dislocated towards the back behind the shoulder; and it's not dislocated away from the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	In the majority of cases, displacement and extradition are difficult due to various factors, especially in those where there is a scarcity of resources or corrupt practices. However, it becomes more challenging when dealing with individuals who have an abundance of power or influence, as they tend to resist such actions through their means.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	The broken bone in the arm caused by a fall from high places into concrete results in swelling of the skin and hematoma formation due to bruising. Also, there may be joint dislocation as a result of impact with water.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	I remind you that your speech involves the water within which you are submerged in; henceforth, you shall process it for purification.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	E is the dislocation of the eye when it moves to the posterior positions; therefore, you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, as their differences are evident; you must feel for the concavity at the end of the dislocated muscle and beyond this point there should be a sensation similar to that felt with an eyebrow pin, and in case of malfunction it cannot return to its original position nor can move it back perseveringly.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If you lose your keys or wallet and later find them, and there's no sign of theft, then it can be assumed they were just misplaced.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	D of this displacement is a gross exaggeration when it's fresh and the malady is childish.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The expansion of the river leads to the rise in its tributaries' levels; and similarly, interest rates increase on their respective loans, and the minister raises his share accordingly; he also enhances the joint fortification at his own location, and the minister raises his share as well, extending it towards that area where it returns excessively.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Mays do not return to the bath if you have already told me; it is from after the meal when the dislocation occurs, a few days and hours later, that the pain is soothed in water with an emollient and liniment as though it were taken by mouth - aloe vera, fenugreek, and melilotus in water. It should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	The illness spreads over the back and is wrapped in a thin layer of anticipation for what it may become, as if caught between levity and constraint. The healer places their hand on the spine above the affected area, lifting up the muscle's head, and throws down the evil spirit to prevent harmful consequences, while another minister supports the head of the malady so that it does not cause further damage, for soon it must return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to do so following this method, present yourself as a man who is much taller than the pain (malaise), and stand on that side of it. Insert your thumb below the point where the malaise hangs in the air and elevate that point upward towards the areas above where the malaise remains suspended. Use another method to pull out the root of the malaise from those upper regions near you.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If May's ailment is the plague, then he must be isolated as soon as possible because it is quite serious and can easily spread again.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	E is reduzit in segmentos secondariamente: ed è che si faccia in terra un fusto lungo con il capo del quale sia redondo di figura, così come pilo di mortaio, che non sia grosso né sottile; poi soppiatte sopra capo del fusto drappi leoni e il malaute sia stante secondo la lunghezza del fustro, ed esteso dallo stesso lato delle parti posteriori; ed è estensibile i suoi cosi dall'altro parte in modo forte, perché la giunzione si ruota al suo posto velocemente.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	It is difficult to reduce it for all the reasons mentioned above, here'n use of this remedy: and it is that you take a stick with the quantity which should be about two spans long, and width of which should be four fingers wide, and the thickness of it being equal in the middle part following this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	A prop about the Caped Redone Sian Lizard, also known as Theodore Seuss, is that he never caused any harm but instead brought joy and laughter through his unique stories and illustrations. His books continue to inspire creativity in children around the world.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Proceed with the palpation of the tender points associated with the malaise and extend your hand over the trunk within the affected areas, and feel for these tenderness sites and related tissues using your hands and fingers.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	The correct translation for "La capsa haix que s'aparegui el braç sobre un escalador i estendi-se al mateix nivel als parts sense, mentre l'altre és suspesa de l'altra banda, quina junctura intra de llargs segons." is:
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	Clean the piercing area thoroughly according to your best ability, and ensure you pause every day for a few minutes near water flow to promote healing; apply an appropriate plaster preparation with pure beeswax and aloe vera ointment over all the muscle, so that it is wrapped downwards, and reinforce gently around the piercing with a clean dressing; let the jewelnery remain above the emplastre, attach the back of the piece to the necklace's chain, and leave it in place for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	Cove that is suffering from little pain should be given food within which the member may find comfort, for it is more beneficial to health.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	The food that was provided earlier has already been consumed by both the violinist and I; therefore, it should not be repeated or softened, as hours have passed since then.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the skin joint is dislocated due to moisture or other causes, it should be treated with caution and three treatments of cauterization according to what has been mentioned in the book on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If the cast has been applied for more than seven days without being removed and the ligament and joint are not immobilized, the plaster and tightness are reduced on some occasions, and it is not immobilized nor can it raise that arm to the affected parts, you should know that at this point, the nerves of which are located in the muscle's cap, they have become either lax or stretched out or softened, so be aware that the joint will never return to its original place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	In case of dislocation that has occurred, the leg and the foreskin or the parts behind should be reduced by gently pulling them back into place with an immediate gentle extension as much as possible until it returns to its normal position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	E shall be administerebit in the other strictur, and cure that within which is healed. (Old English)
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	When the balance of gravity is disturbed in a limb and delay occurs in its movement, at that moment an illness uses various methods to restore the original gravity state and return it to its primary nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter Twenty-Seven - The Legislative Process in the Capital
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Treatment of hip dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Sapiens that the joint is dislocated by difficulty and similarly returns to difficulty; and that one is dislocated in all directions, especially anteriorly towards posteriorly, and the dislocation of it cannot be camoucuased as being cured since two weeks after manipulation or touching according to any figure, whether dislocated. And when you adjust a dislocated joint, so declared manifestly, because the joint cavity is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch itself with its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	"In cases of crotch injuries and strains, prompt attention to prevent the onset of an abscess is crucial; if one does not address it soon enough, reduction becomes difficult and often not fully effective; particularly when occurring in posterior positions, these types are worse than all other forms of dislocation, accompanied by severe pain, and may even lead to death."
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The reduction of the fracture involves two steps that can be performed simultaneously - extending the upper arm (humerus) and expanding the forearm (radius and ulna), while ensuring the surgeon's hands are placed over both sides of the limb, with the mallet gently tapping along their thumbs on either side at joint intervals or inside the palm as they carefully guide it back to its original position.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	The translation of the given text from its original language (possibly Catalan) to English is as follows: "Mays if the dislocation is outward, it returns just as much that doubles my father's hand within which he hits the edge with his fist." This appears to be a metaphorical or poetic expression rather than a literal description.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If the displacement does not obey the reduction rule, hours will experience a strong extension and movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	Article I: Two ministers shall each hold out their arms and maintain that posture until it is relieved of them.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	The arms are displayed in full color and fully developed length, curved long over the left arm, diagonally crossed.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	E quant el metge toka la juntsa al seu mate, untet aquella amb algun oli per su que aquè sia aquellas causes les quals ajuden en lubricitat de la junctura fa facilitar; i aprop empufla la juncte'm vehementament entro que retorne.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Aprop the reduction of her wound that is swoln upon this embalmment in which there is stiffness and exaction is the albumen, and its tendon is loosed from the cord, and it has lain for a number of days without treatment.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Firstly disentangle them; and then at the junction they are formed in their place, the hours you will release the ropes from it and let that be.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If the joint is not torn, wrap your iteration with an elastic bandage and leave it that way for several days until healed; then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Mays decides to stand close to the joint, and its position is slightly moved, allowing for gentle moisturizing in the morning and friction throughout the day, ensuring it remains lubricated; afterwards, he rests on the joint area, creating a sense of fluid motion; and during his sleep, he keeps that warmth near the bones both by day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Here is the translation of your text into English:
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Apothecary'n, gather the following ingredients for a concoction to mend and twist fractures and torcios (torcios may be a misspelling or an archaic term):
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish, pause on that wet and scratched cow's udder at the edge, then rub it back and forth until it dries up; and do this occasionally because it is moist.
Capitol .xxviii.	English: Chapter Twenty-Eight.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Malasse's syndrome (also known as Dowager's Hump) is a condition characterized by an abnormal curvature of the spine, specifically at the junction between the neck and upper back. It often results in a prominent hump on the upper back or "dowager'e" appearance.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The displacement of Malassez's remnants is slight and the reduction of this dislocation is negligible; however, it suggests that there may be some movement in reducing its position at the time of dislocation before it becomes an abscess or leads to one.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation involves stopping the affected limb on a table and extending its length, while the physician places his hand over the joint's axis, then gently pushes until it returns to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it should also be considered that if the palm has already been consumed by the mother's stomnache, at this point a malady may arise in her body; and you must extend and reduce the table before her due to its location intrinsically above the joint. So that the physician can place himself over it with his hands directly on top of that imminent junction.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	If it returns soon, good news indeed! However, if not, these hours will only strengthen the abscess and allow it to spread further; therefore, do not delay treatment or hope for improvement on its own. It's crucial that you seek medical attention promptly.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the Roman joint after its twistedness; and there is no malice at all in it, but rather that it's softened and cannot raise any issue; therefore know that nerves are contracted or torn, and then it is not so much about pulling on it as it is being cauterized properly to promote healing.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	From now on, if you have failed to return the item within two days after receiving it in good condition and with all its accessories, and your efforts of keeping it for further use were futile; then we shall consider the product lost and charge the full amount from you as per our policy.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	The water flow is continuous and changes with gravity, causing rocks to become polished over time through erosion, between which they are embedded.
Capitol .xxix.	I'm pretty sure you meant to ask for "Capitol Records, Inc." which is an American record label based in Hollywood and a wholly owned subsidiablerecord company of the Universal Music Group N.V. Here are some key points about Capitol Records:
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Dislocation of the fingers, or finger dislocations, is a condition where the bones in one or more of your fingers are forced out of their normal position at a joint. This can occur due to various reasons like trauma, sports injuries, accidents, etc. It's essential to seek immediate medical attention if you suspect a finger dislocation to prevent further damage and complications.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some moves are described throughout the entire game.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	"If you find a splinter on your hand or arm, clean the area with mild soap and water first. Then use tweezebrushes to gently remove it from two sides of the skin, avoiding any further dislocation. If part remains lodged deep within, seek medical assistance."
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	A and hold the ends of the rope together, and suspend it from the point to which it is attached, letting go for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Article 1 - All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	In the evening, after that story, and do not stop engaging in physical activity during the day, and read it at night; do this for several consecutive days.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Here's the English translation for your provided Occitan text (note that "fay semblant" and similar phrases are not directly translatable to modern French or English due to their idiomatic nature):
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Pretending to drink an amount of water equal to the other pieces.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital XT
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The cervical dislocation of the two vertebrae in the neck.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	In case of a complete displacement of one or more discs in the neck or back, surgery may be required to replace the affected vertebrae with artificial ones; however, non-surgical treatments are usually preferred initially, as the mortality rate increases if left untreated.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	Signs of water loss include involuntary urination or defecation and the inability to hold it back; as well as frequent visits for clothing changes, one or two glasses of liquid intake, or a spondylitis flare-up at that location. Many times these symptoms have been resolved and many times they have required intervention from four parties (healthcare professioncuos).
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Here is the correct version in Portuguese and its English translation:
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The idea of Mayse's cure lies in considering how the purity of youth can affect healing, as the hours spent on something not beneficial do not contribute to recovery or overall health.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In that which I observe in cementation or percussion or resemblance to those, the ancients have called by many names of therapy by speech, from which even more returns profit; but I am abashed by that of which little is excused for the excess of its use, due to my greater proximity and exposure to it, by which I have thus explained and rendered diverse from that shown above.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	He claims that in the situation where departures are imminent on the pier, it is not healthy or pleasant there; and similarly to those made at two o'clock.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	A is not cured but rather occurs in the very moment that I am referring to.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	E is that the evil spell be cast upon his face as if painted by an equal peer, and extended from there a muscular growth much for his own protection so that he might not be hurt by any stones.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	A prop an upright pole with a crossbeam at the top of it and another beam on either side holding weights on both ends of the pole.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister shall carry the casket without resting it in a grave; another minister shall hold the other part according to this procedure.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	In this step, you will wrap the head of the mallet with thick cloth or padding to protect your hands from blisters and chafing; then extend the end of the handle towards the striking face, which is on top, and hold that in place; next, securely tighten the other junction over both arms where the heads are, making sure they're firm. Finally, adjust all joints properly to ensure a good grip on the other piece of wood, which supports the weights.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Article L140-26 of the French Civil Code states that a successor to an inheritance may extend their share (lien successoral) to the part assigned by the testator, and as such are not removed from the shares and portions of their places in which they are situated; but however, it shall not be separated so as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	Place your hands over the stronghold of the vertebra in such a way that it returns, and place those on that one table, adjusting them onto the table until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If Maya doesn't return in this manner, hours will take a table of which the latitude or longitude is within three degrees of her location, and drill into the wall on which we have said that it is best to make a hole at one end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	E aprop a pausa de la mayta del tapís sobre el espondilo, y el médico pone sus manos sobre la otra extremidad, y después, rápidamente entrelaza los dedos para que el espondilo se desbloquee y vuelva a su lugar.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you want to do this in the same manner as above at the place of the altar (let's assume it means an altar or sacred space), then you should stand on the ground, and your feet shall be together at a distance equal to one armspan between them; and your head will be in line with the last two stakes on either side, which are each a length of one palm apart. In every stake where it turns around, its motion is fixed in place on the ground so that none of them may move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	Let S be a hollow cylinder with radius r and height h, whose axis is at the origin, and let R(θ) = (r*cosθ, r*sinθ, z), where -h/2 <= z <= h/amoùt. Then the revolving surface E is described by the set of points {R(θ): 0 <= θ < 2π} in space.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the tip of its branch is a cross wherein the trunk is formed, the length of which equals one span and a quarter that is rolled around; in the other two branches it is similar to this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	A firmly establish the connections that you have strained during times of malice and distress, and those bonds that you have strengthened in your past endeavors for which you shall bear responsibility, and the ties that you have formed throughout experiences with them from which you shall carry the weight.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	A near each door stands a minister who guards the door and makes sure it matches what has been said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	French: Voici la forme du tore :
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	The spinous process has returned to its original position and the location is identical again; in some cases, pauses are required to reinforce excision of an albumin fracture, and a stopop is placed; then the pause is applied using the stiffening element of a table with which length varies by three inches or more and width is equal to the quantity needed for the height of the vertebrae, and over the location of the spinous process.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Upon careful observation and based on what has been mentioned, use the subtle effects of malnutrcuition to maintain good health.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	There is no immediate danger at the site after sanitation, but there should be continuous monitoring and administration of disinfecting medicines that may last for a long time, which we have recommended; already administered in that location with a layer of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Some cases of acute appendicitis present with pain in the latter part of the second ribs, and it is related to that displacement; this bone is which already predisposes so that you don't need such a procedure for this treatment, because it greatly increases your risk of mortality.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXV. The Capital City
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	It should be known that the joint of the shoulder and the joint of the muscle do not only result in dislocation but also lead to conditions such as inflammamoins, ligament tears, tendonitis or other injuries caused by minor movements and deformations. Other factors can cause similar issues at different joints with slight mobility changes and concavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The fracture is displaced according to four directions; it can be displaced towards the inside (medial), outside (lateral), in front of or forward (anteriorly), or behind or backward (posteriorly).
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	The majority of it is displaired to the front parts, and little to the back or side parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	Sign of the displacement from the left to the right sides is four, when you adjust the sick bed towards the healthier side, it becomes longer and more prominent than that of the sane, and the illness cannot double its pace; instead, it must be spoken through your words. And it is the place where one should administer the ointment of healing balm for swelling caused by inflammamoines, so that the head of this affair has arrived here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of that which causes displacement to the parts outside is that its effects contradict this incident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	In the sign of the man to whom dislocation occurs at the fore limbs beyond his reach according to the standard complement, but not exceeding that pain which is in the hindquarters; and if he proceeds on foot and cannot go towards the fore limbs; his urine is retained and his gait is lame, so you must walk him on level ground.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	Sign of the tree to which a dislocation occurs in its parts behind is that it does not expand at the knot, nor pulls up to bend that branch twice as much, and the cambium on one side is more swolpress than the other, and the collar is softened, and the top of the trunk is towards that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of spices in this displacement is that you consider, at times, if the displacement is old and ancient, which has already become outdated according to your administration's policy on reductions, then it is not necessary for there to be a compensation in that situation; therefore, no need to make any further adjustments.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case of recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocations, you should return to the joint position and gently extend it towards both inner and outer parts as well as right and left sides; do not delay in doing so.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If Mays does not return in this manner, the hours he has prepared shall bring forth and extend the chain of light from the departure side, or on his own behalf, or with his hand, lay over the chain above the designated spot; another minister shall extend the same chain as far as his shadow falls upon it; and yet a third person shall bind by the leash to the rope of the cause, holding firmly at its extremity.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	C is the extension of line o from the vertex to the opposite side in the triangle or from the vertex behind to the other side of the triangle.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	E is the extension of all those in a district where the malaria incidence is high and they suffer from its effects on their health.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is particularly common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	If the displacement returns what we have said, then it is true; otherwise, hours are necessary for the entire water that you speak of regarding one's own injury.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated and the displacement occurs in frontal directions, causing that pain to be projected over its left side; and as well pushes the limbs upwards from the root of the clavicle to where it extends on this location between the head of the clavicle and the place which lies behind the neck; and furthermore expands outward towards the front part of the scapula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Another minister took hold of the matter seriously and extended his efforts to various departments in order to address the issue effectively. Soon enough, the situation returned to its original location.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This is a particularly light therapy for the condition in which the affected member is reduced compared to other treatments.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	Mays, I excuse myself for not adhering to this form of curative therapy in its entirety. However, it is crucial that both parties receive the necessary treatment at the same time during these periods when the two weights of illness are combined together with love and trust on both sides - through words and actions alike.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Let E be the length of each segment being four times their quantity, and let the bad curvature extended more than the other by a difference of two units in length.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Apologize for the inconvenience caused to your vessel's hull, and ensure that it is promptly removed; and be of a length equal to twice the height above the ground.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	The boy was commanded to cut off the head of the cockatrice, and be hanged from it for any other young man who dares challenge him; while the other boy removes the cockatrice's head with great strength, thrusting upwards, causing the jointed creature to return to its original place at a swift speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In Mays, when there is a reduction in its own dislocation and it has shifted too far away, the pain continues to act according to what we have recounted earlier, with swelling around the affected joint itself as well as over the limbs themselves.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Near the head of the stake, one end should be weighted with lead and the other pointed; and near the top of the stake they should adjust their ropes so that thick cloth surrounds it, to ensure that the evil spirit is not exorcised by its being amidst his possessions, thus you must extend your influence beyond these bounds lest it be provoked.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Every minister is entitled to an equal share, and the physician shall receive his portion accordingly as per the provision of law.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	If reversed, it will be great; if not, pause carefully and thus as we have said in conclusion for that agreement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	At Mays Cove, the jaguar quietly lounges over his lair in quiet contemplation.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When the dislocation is towards the fingers, hours ago it was known that the bandage should be extended lengthwise; according to this narrative on the puppet, the surgeon places his right palm over the mallet and ties one arm with the other tied member, and then extends that arm towards the fingers previously mentioned at the end of the string.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is towards the back parts, there should be doubt that the illness extends to the left parts as well, and it is elevated above ground; one may assume it'n to be resting on a hard surface, just as when we said of its extension over two widths (widths referring to the breadth of the patient), so too its face should be extended, according to what has been previously mentioned. There should be no harm in this case.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	A compression table is applied to the site where there are joints.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	When the reduction is completed according to how you can — and the sign of the reduction does not show on your body, and you extend from those bad habits, and when you touch those scales and make them visible outside the other scale and expand that excuse, then know that the member after which the reduction was made — return it back together with both sides evenly and avoid any unevenness in either part; also adhere to rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	A prop of the leaning and the flattened, compare the one with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those people behaving in that manner, remember that the disturbance has already been stopped, so let go of any resentment.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If there is no sign of improvement after using this remedy, you should return and reapply that plaster as per your initial bandaging, leaving it on for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	After the cast is removed, he may take some time to walk on ashes for nearly two weeks, during which he will be comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 22
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Treatment of the dislocated shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The verb "desentonar" is conjugated according to three ways, it's detonated in the parts before, and in the parts inside, and in the parts left more than in the parts behind; but not in the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of the lunar eclipse is that you command the malady to apply its spell upon the cosmos; then, you shall know when the devil is displaired.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The complete ritual of full moon involves you addressing the Moon to alleviate any distress it may be experiencing, only if its influence has already extended over your land and it is within your power; then clasp the back of your hands together in front of you, and pause with palms touching. Then firmly adhere your thumbs against each other on either side of its body. Extend your legs beneath it to provide a stable base as the Moon regains its position. This ritual is believed to bring balance and harmony during this special lunar phase.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	A sign of divine redirection in life is that your current path may lead you to the house above without any effort on your part.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Article: The Israelites were commanded to take the two goats and assign one for God (the Lord) while marking the other as belonging to the scapegoat. They then tied each of these marked goats by their hands for three or four days, after which they would release them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	E non usi l'uso della malattia dell'ambulazione per i giorni in cui sei stato curato e confortato.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	My apologies for the delay in getting back to you; I've been preoccupied with overseeing some extended leave arrangements that were mentioned in the previous case about a spine injury.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter III: The Legislative Branch - Congress and Its Structure
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Treatment of ankle dislocation
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The small plow turns some plots of land, and other plots are tilled according to design, and the tilling of these is done either within or around individual sections.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The hallmark of this type of dislocation is that it occurs as a result of an impact to the side where the flat bone has been displawed from its original position.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May's cure of the removal process should be a lightly burdensome endeavor and it is to be as accessible as possible for everyone so that it can return smoothly.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the case of a dislocation caused by an injury, it is recommended that you do what's right to alleviate the pain and have someone strong and capable from your team support you in moving the affected area gently.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Bend down your right hand and place it on the top of the highest sacred object; then place your left hand to the immediate right side (your) of that, at the location of the knob or handle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Aim the arrow at your target, then draw back with your right hand, and extend it forward; shoot by releving the string of your right arm's bow to make three attempts.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	"E àgua dosso-se dividiu segundo a contagem, the water split according to the count." (Portuguese)
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	C is pushing the pieces to the third chessboard and you are in checkmate.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If an item is found in the first or second array based on this method and you find its pair, it's good; if not, repeat the operation for the hour as many times as necessary until that item returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Mays si te es prohibido reducir l'agua che avem recomandà, allora fai un male uso del tuo tempo sulla terra, e non inizi nessun nuovo progetto qui su la Terra, e che questo faccia parte delle cose di lui. Inoltre, ti sei già ripiegato sopra di lui con quel telo per evitare il malocchio.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Article I - The ministers of each language shall submit their claims to the Minister for Languages within one month from the date of this Agreement; and within two months thereafter, each Minister shall extend his hand (or equivalent gesture) over the head of the other as a sign of friendship and goodwill. Furthermore, each Minister shall extend a line between themselves corresponding to the length of their respective claims.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	A) The orthopedist relocates the displacement in their own limbs and another minister restores the health of the remaining parties as displacement returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	So let it return the displacement and be declared to you as the sanity of the reduction of its light hours, with an added pause and stretching that strengthens those limbs greatly, and link up with your ally in trade.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	I pray to the angels who protect you from behind the nerves which lie beneath your scalp, that the hair upon it may not fall out vigorently and woefully.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	A propria asserzione afferma che dovrebbe essere rimossa entro due gioramo tre giorni; e se il lamento è ammollito, estratti quel.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	On the following day or in four days, and forbids any evil intent towards immigration for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	Mays lest go to that place, he does not make sure that the displacement is not overly dissolved and corrupted, and also ensures that it does not contain any harmful substances.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	E decided to have the abscess lanced, a few hours later he knew that you were treating it in the clinic where our story began, at another location for treatment and embroidery, before which it was successful.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 24 - The Continuing Conflict
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The treatment of the displacement of the bones in the leg.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	That which is deemed difficult often involves little extension of work; and that which is not so challenging tends to be considered more deceitful.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If your dislocation is in the acromion of both shoulders, it will cause you great pain on the top part of your back or over a table, and so intense that it feels like when going uphill.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then to the east of that isle stands your peak above the sea level that you may imagine at the joints, and right on top of that hill lies a tree of great value through which you will return, and see that it is equally matched and not present in the same place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	E - It is advisab le pausa of the stomach from all food intake for three days, during which two capsules are taken daily; then a period of rest and ambulation is followed for several days to ensure strengthening and recovery.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 55.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Among the displacements that would be relevant in case of a fall, fracture, or any other injury, some important ones include:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	He who neglects any cause of those things, and you remain idle in the cure or restoration of them, numerous times death succeeds as a result.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	In the chosen cure that lies over the curative process of your affliction, do not resort to those who lack experience in their craft, are distant and uncaring, hasty or pretentious; rather, seek out one who is skilled, well-versed, merciful, and compassanguous. They should only use medications that provide relief from boils exclusively when necessary, and should guide the ailment towards divine judgment not with presumption but to those whom you hope for healing from severe danger, as an alleviation of illness, where there is at least some glimmer of hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Therefore, I will attempt to make a summary of the argument in its initial stages before it becomes infected with logical fallacies.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	Therefore, if the member is to be returned according to our wishes, hours are spent administering the appropriate regimen which prevents infection and treats the wound with water or ointment as necessary.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	When there is a dislocation or accident causing separate fragments of bone, the person should seek medical attention immediately and follow any instructions given at that time regarding simple illnesses that occurred before in those locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	E watch and avoid the temptation in your heart according to my previous warning; for it is better for you to serve your Creator, and bring more glory to yourself, along with health to all true things within your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	"May Albuquerque's words be accurately quoted, and may God bless them."
Amen.	Indeed, amen! How may I assist you today?
