O you, dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its contents, and I have made the end through its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and completely abandoned everywhere, the science has been lost and fragmented, and nothing remains of its essence except for small descriptions in books by the ancients that have been moved or modified by hand. And from this came the errors and vanity, and intentions were closed off and the science was distanced.
It seems to me that I should revive it together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the cautery tools, and of other instruments of the work along with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because no skilled masters of the craft are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And it is necessary for those who engage in it to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the truth about the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations from each other, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of them, and the movement and position of moving and stationary veins, and their points of origin.
And for this Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and especially in the art of practice.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above should be careful not to fall into error and harm people;
Thus, I have seen many times those who meddle with this science and abandon themselves without knowledge and without experience.
For I saw a foolish physician who incised an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut into the arteries of her neck; for which reason so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another physician who treated a stone in the urine of a man, and the stone was large; and he took a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to remove it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut into it he would die.
And I saw another physician who took in charge a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was an open wound;
and the physician, full of ignorance, applies the splint too tightly over the wound on the bones, leaving no cloth at all to cover the wound, and he left it thus.
and he commands that it must not be loosened.
and he left it like this until the leg and foot were completely swollen, leading to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and loosen the leg; and when I loosened it, he felt at ease and did not feel any pain.
But the corruption was already established in the limb, and it could not be healed.
And the corruption continued to spread through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
And I saw another physician who drained the embedded abscess and then inflamed it by the malice of his lordship.
For a carbuncle, when it is full of melancholic humor, must not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place where one can remove all that is corrupted.
And for that reason, children, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two categories: that is to say, work where there is danger in many circumstances;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be careful so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your arms in this situation, and approach your patients gently yet firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may reach salvation and be praised;
and let the dreadful diseases of severe illness be left;
and remove yourselves from what causes doubt, and act in such a way that you may come from this world to the next in glory.
Galenus said in some of his admonitions: Do not take care of a bad illness, or you may be called a mad doctor.
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal hot cauterizations, and the chapter is organized from head to feet;
and about the forms of instruments, and cauterization tools, and all that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and the chapter is organized and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and is organized from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus, as we remember the work, it is necessary for me to tell about the quality of the aid and harm of each temperament.
I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest discourse and subtle science and secret responses;
and many wise people spoke about this, and agreed on it;
And they bore my patience with their words, for I fear the length.
I say that the cautery universally aids all temperaments where there is matter, except for two temperaments: that is to say, the hot temperament without matter, and the dry temperament without matter.
In the hot and dry temperament together with matter, some have discussed and said that cautery is great help there; and others said the opposite: that cautery is not useful for a disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat a hot disease by heat, nor for dryness;
And he who says the opposite that the cautery greatly helps the hot and dry disease that comes to the bodies of men. For when you examine the body of the man and his moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it to be true on some occasions through experience.
And in every way, do not intervene except for he who has experienced it, and who knows through long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of human constitutions, and the predispositions and causes of their diseases, and the outcomes and the space of time;
we do not fear other constitutions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the doctors assembled and agreed on the cauterization.
And know, son, that the fire cautery together is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than the burning medicinal cautery.
For the fire is simple, and does not affect any part other than the limb that is being treated, and it does no harm to another member if one can name such.
The hot medicines come from one member to another in succession, and cause the member to become ill with difficult recovery; and by chance kill the patient.
The fire, for its height and for the quality of its substance, does not cause that, if there is no excess.
And this I have found through experience and by the length of service and study that I have dedicated to the art, and it is upon the truth of things;
and for this reason I excuse myself for the length of speech, because it does not please me to take from you the secret that is hidden in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it overcomes bodily diseases, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; therefore receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time should be chosen for performing the cauterizations, and selected appropriate times.
And I say that the cautery is appropriate at all times, because the evils arising are removed by the aid of the cautery; and especially if the cauterizations are necessary for pains that cannot wait, so that the time does not allow greater harm to come to the member.
And think nothing of it, dear child, as foolish doctors do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say it thus;
and they say it thus; but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors which are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for its haste in healing due to its power, and the virtue of its work and sovereignty.
And it is possible for the illness to come sometimes according to the constitution of the patient and the location of the illness and its power;
and are gathered within him the excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered in places where there is an abundance of excesses and moisture, such as cauterizations for toothache pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but it rarely happens.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the rear of medicine, and this is true;
but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth after medicines, but their beliefs are false, and cauterizations are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in certain illnesses and they are ineffective, then we administer the cauterization, and it works.
Then it is clear that cauterization is among the last of medicines, not as the foolish doctors intend.
The ancients said that cauterizations with an instrument of gold are milder than those of iron, and they said this not for any reason other than the quality of the gold and the height of its substance;
and they said that the scar from a cauterization does not cause irritation, but this is not true because I have tested it and found that it is true in some people;
and cauterizations with gold are gentler than those with iron, as they claim. And still, when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell by its color when it is hot, and it cools down so quickly;
and if you heat it too much; do with fire; and thus there is sufficient obstruction.
I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the way may be easier to find.
This cautery is useful for moisture and cold affecting the brain, and there are two that are made due to a disease called "soda," and due to many humors descending from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for an abundance of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine cleansing the head for three nights or four, according to what the virtues and age and habit of the patient can endure; and then do behind the head of the patient.
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his thighs;
then place the root of your palm on the base of his nose between his two eyes; And there where your two means will come, if it bleeds then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", of which here is the form: And place on the spot an ink stain, and do it descending and pulling your hand little by little in turning; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot if you see the bone slightly; and if you do not see it, then repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
after take a little wax, and place soft cotton inside it, and put it on the spot, and leave it for three days;
Then put moist wool over it; and leave it on until the burn is gone; Then treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmakon" until it is healed.
And the ancient ones said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason, it aids in healing.
And some say that one should leave the cautery long enough for part of the bone to be burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and treat it.
And others say that the cautery should be left on for so long and pressed so hard that it penetrates the bone as wide as the rod that women put in their hair to draw out the humors;
and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after which it should be cleaned and treated.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem entirely good to me, except in some people where there is reason for fear;
and I think that I should leave it out;
for the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we witness in other limbs;
and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems safer and more appropriate to me, I then proceed with it for safety.
When chronic pain comes to the entire head and lasts for a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills which are called "cochie", and undergo purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, it is not effective. Take care if the head of the patient is of strong constitution, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize slightly below that point as we mentioned above. After perform cauterization on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we said before, and perform the cauterization at the place called "vasselz"; and there are the places where one applies suction cups; and place your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later;
and it is necessary that the cauteries for the horns be finer than those used to cauterize the soft part of the head, and this is their form:
For the cautery of the head When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the illness extends to the eye, and the joint is purged by cleansing medicines, and all the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases have been performed, and none of this helps: Then I perform cauterizations according to two methods, namely with dry medicine and with fire.
The cauterization with dry medicine is done by taking a piece of alum, removing the skin and wrapping it in a small cloth, then applying it to the temple where the pain is located so that you can place the wrapped piece of alum beneath the skin.
and when it is placed, cover and press it well and leave it for twelve hours; and then remove it and treat the area with garlic wrapped in cloth, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then apply a poultice of butter wrapped in cloth until it saturates the area.
After the treatment of ointment until it is healed;
and if you wish to do so, use some burning medicines that I have written in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
The cautery of iron is done according to this method. Heat the cautery which has the following form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is shaped like a dome with a small depression in the middle.
and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, until half of the thickness of the heart's surface is burned.
and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and to avoid excessive bleeding.
After place cotton on bandage for three days; then place moistened cotton on leather, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed;
and if you wish to cauterize this swelling with the cautery called "cultellare", do it to the entire tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this swelling which is not old.
of swelling/inflammation
When you treat a swelling as we have said before in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and see that the cauterizations previously mentioned from medicine and iron do not help, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white;
and mark thus on the painful area a line half a digit long, and remove your hand once, to avoid cutting the artery and reaching the bone;
and be wary of the mandible that moves when eating, and the nerve must be careful so that it does not cause movement and spasm in the patient, and beware of blood loss from the artery when it is cut, as cutting causes great fear and especially for one who is not familiar with it, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the work midway;
but I will tell you how to control bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not alleviate the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize on top of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
and if you see it necessary, apply the cauterization that we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, using a cauterizing instrument with two blades; and this type of cauterization is better and more beneficial.
of the pain in the ears due to coldness
When pain from coldness comes to the ear, and medicine has been applied and other treatments we have described in the division are used, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "points," here is its form:
After puncture all around the diseased ear, or both ears if the pain is in both, and move up a little from the base of the ear after you have marked the spot; and place ten points around each ear;
after treating the area until it is healed.
of the treatment of the mouth
A condition that must be treated with cauterization is not exempt from those that move due to phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases;
and do not perform cauterization on conditions that come from dryness and nerve spasms.
When you treat this condition of pain that moves due to phlegm from the head and gargling, and if it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and apply it towards the top of the ear just below the point of the ear, and another in the temple as far as a palm's length; and leave the cautery on until half of the heart area is burned;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is similar to the cautery we have described before, but it is a bit more subtle and the knife should be slightly larger;
After treating the area as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is long-standing and treating it as we have described does not help, and the patient has no fever, then you perform four cauterizations: Two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cauterization above the stomach.
and let them be treated as we have said before.
For litargia
For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of medicine and pills to purify the brain;
After raising the head of the patient completely, place the plaster of mustard, which is written in the treatise on plasters, upon the occiput;
and this is the method of the cautery: do as I have said.
If it is done thus, it is good; and if it is not, make three cauterizations from the middle of the head descending to the neck, and let there be a space of one thumb's width between each cauterization;
and treat it as you would the others, and if you wish to add more, and the patient is suffering, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and treat until it is healed;
and let the cauterization be what is called "olivare," as I said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hair and of what we said before;
after raising the head of the patient, then perform cauterization in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three along the spine of the neck;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then perform four cauterizations along the spine of the back; and leave it until the most reddened part is burned, and lift your hand; after the treatment until it is healed, and use the cauterization method called "olivare" which we mentioned earlier.
of epilepsy
Those with epilepsy should not use the fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain from herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffers greatly from severe illness.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, perform gargling and chewing remedies to cleanse the brain often with good meats;
after placing the head in the middle, perform the cauterization as we said before, and do the cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and suffering, perform cauterizations as I said for those who have paralysis and weakness of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and use olive cauterizations as described.
If the patient is a child, perform the subtle cautery according to this method:
When due to melancholy the excesses or moistures are corrupted and phlegm is thick, then apply such cauterizations as we have described to one who suffers from paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the excesses tend towards melancholy and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies the brain according to what is stated earlier in the division.
After raising the patient's head; after making the bandage of linen well, as circular, place it on the head;
and the patient should sit crossed-legged, held firmly from all sides;
then present the linting material, which should be wool from an old sheep; and heat it over the fire until it can be applied to the patientâ€™s wound without causing pain; then empty the circle inside the head bandage and let it cool;
and do this for the patient once every week with other good management until he is healed.
When you wish to cauterize it, make multiple punctures all over the cauterized area.
This method of cautery moistens the brain excessively;
and then apply cotton soaked in butter and goose fat.
from the pain of the eyes When the pain first comes to the eyes by the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying to drink, and protect them from all moisture, and make them sweat in baths several times on an empty stomach.
After instructing him to lie with his head down, perform a cautery in the middle of the head, and apply two cauterizations on each temple if the descent of the brain is to both eyes together, or one if it is to one eye;
and cover the entire cautery with all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
and be wary of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with as much force as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the caution how you will stop it;
and sometimes a cautery is made to separate the two bones behind.
and when you see that it is due to cold phlegmatic excesses, then I make the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter descending to the eyes: I make one cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries where the two bones are separated; and if there is need for more, then cauterize carefully above the eyebrow with the small cautery.
When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and it is of no use, then give the patient three cups to drink for three nights; after the king's head, and apply the cauterization in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery; and make two cauterizations of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the hair;
and be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.
And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the white of the eye becomes softened due to illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare". Of which this is the form:
And if you wish, make two cauterizations on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
and do not let go of the hand until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
of the hair that points towards the eye Sometimes the hair of the eyes grows inward and pricks the eye, and one makes cauterizations according to two methods: that is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then place the patient in your care; after marking on the paper around the eyes a shape that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs;
then place cotton moistened in egg white and parsley juice on the eye, then heat the cautery which is of this form:
After cauterizing around the shape that you marked little by little many times, so that the flesh is burned in that place;
and the signs of the treatment's success are that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs raised at the edge of the eye;
then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then place moistened cotton with butter until the inflammation subsides; after the treatment of salving until it is healed.
And if the hairs come after that, and the skin is softened, then restart the cautery on the same spot as you did before;
and if the hairs are absent, then cauterize until the skin rises to its natural position and is even, so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
The fiery cauterization is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make a form from parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf;
then take one part each of French soap and live charcoal, and grind them together well; And I do it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it over the area as you would with myrtle leaves, and place a paper on the eyes; And if the illness affects only one eye, then treat that one, and both if it is in both; And place cotton moistened with egg white on the eye;
And the patient's head should be on your right and place your left hand over the medicine, and press the cup and cloth every time the patient feels a tingling from the medicine, for they feel it as if from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine at its proper time. And when the tingling has passed, lift the area of the application, and observe if you see the paper lifted as if it were raised by the constraint of fire or by an incision; And if it is thus, then it is well.
If not, then reapply the medicine to the place where it was applied until your work is even, and your eyes are set properly;
then apply moistened cotton with butter until the burned area is covered, and then treat the ointment site which is called "diaphysis" and others, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary for you to be very careful with your work so that none of the medicine gets into your eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft after that, and the hair irritates the eye, then reapply the medicine to the softened area properly, as you did before; then treat it until it is healed;
and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And note that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and adjust accordingly your treatments;
and do not dismiss the proper way for those who study this art.
for the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary that you perform a cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head on your lap; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor should he shift his head;
then place moistened cotton in vinegar or parsley juice on the eye;
After heating the cautery which is similar:
and place it on the head as the shape of a quill feather, so that the entire cautery is aligned;
if you wish, it should extend from one side of the head to the other, and if you prefer, it should be like a tent;
but in any case, this position is better for your work.
After pressing the open fistula and removing the pus, dry it; and if it is closed, work on it and draw out the humor;
After place the hot cautery, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nose above the eye, so that your hand does not act foolishly; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and it corrupts.
If you proceed to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well. If not, then begin the cautery again once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days;
after place cotton moistened in butter, and the treatment of a dry ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then place a watery corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king according to what he would come in his chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients described. Attend to the fistula, and clean the area; after placing in the opening a fine piece of wax, here is the form it should take: and make it in the quantity of one ounce; and hold your hand on the wax firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the melted wax does not run into their eye;
and it is necessary to place over the patient's eye cotton moistened in egg whites or honey:
the poultice should be applied to the area of the fistula, and it will heal wonderfully.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer a puncture with a knife, and bring the fistula back into the body of the knife according to what is proper in its own place.
of cracks in the lips Often there are cracks in the lips which are called "hairs," especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
And place it quickly into those crevices until it comes to the top;
after treating the area with plaster until it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the gums or in the uvula, or at the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it becomes putrid and swollen and grows old and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not improve: then you must use the cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the opening or passage of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches its depth, and at the far end;
and do thus once or twice after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it is healed;
and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums soften due to moisture and the teeth become loose, and you treat it with medicine but that is ineffective, then place the patient's head on your lap; after heating the cautery in such a manner that you place a chain on the tooth;
and put quickly into the cautery hot heat, and hold so long that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after lift your hand and restart the cautery according to your will;
after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let it stay for one hour and rinse out afterwards.
And in this manner, the tooth that was moving becomes fixed, and the softened gum is restrained, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
of the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold, where there is actual coldness, and medical treatments are ineffective, then there is need for cautery according to two methods: and cautery with leather and cautery with fire.
Cautery with leather is such that you take leather from the hide, and cut it into a spoon-shaped piece of iron or brass; After take cotton and wrap around the tip of a needle, and melt it in butter boiled, and apply to the aching tooth quickly and keep until it is cooled;
and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish to melt wool and cotton in cold butter, and apply it to the aching tooth, and place hot iron on it until the heat reaches the top of the tooth.
The fire cautery is such that you take a piece of iron or copper, and let it be thick so the heat does not reach the patient's mouth;
After heat the cautery, from which the form will come next, and apply it to the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled;
Do this often, for the pain will be removed on that very day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery, and then lie still;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And apply the cautery to whichever area you wish, according to your ability;
and this is the form of the cane:
scrofulas When scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery as described below in its form, and have two openings for the smoke to escape from the opposite side of the cautery;
and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice as needed until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to its size, and leave it like this for three days; and apply moist wool wrapped in butter until the burn is gone;
after treating the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When the moistures overpower in the channels of the body, especially when it comes from cold temperament, then the patient must first be treated with solvent medications.
After you make a cautery at the root of the throat, be careful not to go up to the throat, and do not burn near the heart but just a little.
After you make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cauterizations which are called "clavile" be as we have described their form before;
and treat the area as we said before until it is healed.
When all the diseases of paralysis are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then make two cauterizations on the forearm in their places; And the other cautery between two mammary glands;
And let the cautery called "clavile" be according to the form previously described.
And if you wish, make a cautery by pricking the entire cautery called "poins" for which the form is described above in the disease of the ears;
And let the points be up to thirty, or inquire around for this practice.
After treating the area as described previously, let the cauterizations be three times according to this form:
And because the cauterizations are lighter, do three of them at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movements as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After have the patient lie on their back and side; then lift the knee that is inside the thigh with both of your left hand;
And if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two edges of copper; this is its form:
And cauterize the skin until it pierces to the bone, and the shape of the cautery will result in four cauterizations;
And for that reason, the cautery is made with a cautery that has three edges, which results in six shapes of cauterizations;
And the nerve is as fine as a thread, and this is the form of the cautery that has three edges:
And sometimes it is adjusted on this one handle, so there are eight cauteries.
After placing the cautery, put on crushed herbs with salt; After having the patient rest, do not move the limb for a long time until it is well settled.
And if it is dislocated above, which thing happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery nodule, or many cauteries in pricking.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach such that it strains its constitution, and the catarrh is multiplied within him, and in the usual methods of cure he finds no benefit, then it must be that the patient be laid on his back, and stretch out his legs and hands. From then on, perform three cauterizations. Open the pus container with the spoon of pitch in the quantity of two doses, for the entire cautere clavile, and two cauterizations outside the two sides until the figure of the cauterizations forms at three angles, and keep such a space between one and the other that they do not join together when they discharge pus.
and let the cauterizations be deep enough to reach both sides of the chest, and let the shape of the cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
And if you wish to cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form;
And he who fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and cutting one point on the stomach according to the quantity you wish of it; then cauterize with the entire cautery which is called "points".
After the treatment of the condition we had before, as long as it is healed.
When the liver suffers pain from cold and moisture and from excessive gas, to such an extent that it is weakened from its natural temperament by excesses; and the patient is treated with what we have said in the divisions, and it does not help him, then it is necessary that the patient be bled from his head; and mark three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, away from the hypochondriac regions, where the ribs of a person are;
and there should be a space between each cauterization equal to the thickness of a finger; and let the cauterization be along the length of the body, and do not press too hard with your hand along the entire cauterization;
and let it be burned only halfway up the heart, and let the patient stand straight on his feet;
and if he cannot stand, let him lie down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms;
And if your intention is to cauterize these cauterizations on the scapula, do so if you are skilled and wise in the art, but beware that you do not burn the entire heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and let it not reach the eye, for the vein is very delicate there, and you should know this well.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain, but not too strong;
and if it is in the membrane, the patient feels intense pain.
And when this treatment requires the use of leeches, it is necessary that the patient lie on their head;
and then mark the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a reed, as described in this form: And cauterize the cautery until the flesh is burned, and it reaches to sepsis, until all the corruption is burnt away;
after the treatment according to the treatment of blisters until it is healed;
and it is not appropriate for anyone other than those who have studied medicine extensively to use this cautery, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured at times.
Then he may boldly proceed with the operation, yet it seems to me that waiting would be better.
for the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make cauteries for ulcers using the roots of aristolochia, and in such a manner: take a root of aristolochia as long as you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your thumb; And the grease in oil, and press it to the fire, and I cauterize between the neck and jaw, and II small cauters a little descending in the part which is below the beard;
And II cauters between the fifth and sixth rib, inclining backward a little; And I cauter between the heels, and one above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the sides of the buttocks outside the cauter which is between the two shoulders;
And do not press your hand, but rather do it openly as when smelling.
And some ancient ones say that some people use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; And the pain jumps out, as we have said regarding the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear that the patient may die immediately, or a fistula may occur that cannot be healed.
Of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it is of no benefit, then they present three methods of cautery that are all good.
In one manner, you should make three cauterizations, or four, in a line along the length of the thigh, according to the shape of the cautery for the liver that we mentioned earlier;
and do not press your hand on the entire cauterization area, and let the patient lie on their back;
and another method of cauterization is to heat the double-nerved cautery as we have shown in the case of shoulder dislocation;
and lift the thigh where the patient's cut comes from the left side, and let the elevation you raise the thigh on be along the length of the leg, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizations be according to the width of the body.
After placing the two inflamed nerves until the pain is felt on the other side, and then draw out the fire cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you wish, cauterize with the fire cautery to three nerves.
After the treatment when pus has been discharged for a long time, it is better than the other treatments mentioned before.
Cautery is not effective for one with hydropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must perform four cauteries around the buttocks, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one near the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one by the foot; and let the cauteries be close to the site of the pain.
After leaving the cautery open to expel pus for a long time, do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery. and healing would be hastened, and both intentions would be together with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the abdomen should be the cleaver that we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as it is placed here before.
When the feet are swollen in one who is suffering from dropsy and are filled with yellow fluid, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery turning.
And do not enter too deeply, thus you would go beyond the reddened area, and place the cauterization according to this form:
After make on each leg two cauterizations on each thigh at the tip of the kneecap; and let the cauterizations be long, one above the knee in front and one below the knee, on each leg;
and leave the cauterizations exposed for a long time without cleaning them, so the pus can drain;
after performing the other treatments that we have mentioned.
When abdominal discharge comes from cold and moisture, to the point that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be treated by usual methods; And you see the patient suffering greatly and of great strength, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been discussed here before regarding the cautery of the stomach, at the circular cautery. And four subtle cauteries around the mouth, and one subtle clavicle-shaped cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform cautery on the navel, and one cautery on each armpit, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large area, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
on the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and they are old and consist of cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we said in the divisions, and it does no good, then make cauteries: Three on the spine of the back, those that are far out from between each vertebra in a triangular pattern, and one cautery under the mouth two below.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the food does not cook, and one sees swelling in the face, then place a large cautery on the stomach as was said before, and another on the liver, and yet another on the spleen for the entire cautery process. And leave the cautery in place for a long time. After treatment, ensure the area is healthy.
When you apply althaea, heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it fully heated on the applied althaea. and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the beginning of the vein, from which the blood flows.
do this once or twice, and if there is much althaea, cauterize each area as we have said. after the treatment of beneficial ointments until they are healed;
and if you use a large cautery on the affected area, it will provide greater assistance.
When the patient cannot tolerate incision or opening, which we will discuss in its place, such a disease comes that can only be healed by cautery.
When a fistula comes to someone and it is inflamed and discharges putrid matter and corrupt moisture, then you should prove it with a fine probe at all times, and make sure that you know the depth of the probe at all times.
Heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the extent that the tent has entered, and continue with the cautery until the putrid and corrupted flesh is burned, once or twice or thrice, as needed.
and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins.
if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder and the intestine, be cautious in those areas, and do not perform it forcefully except in soft tissue, and remember that it is not penetrable.
After treating the wound until it is healed, and if the wound is sealed, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then you can know that the wound is completely healed;
and if the matter has not been removed, know that the wound is obstructed, and the bone may become corrupted; and thus as one of those we will mention in its place.
When pain from cold comes to the thighs, and due to large flatulence, and does not respond to treatment with women's remedies, then you must perform a cautery on the thighs from both sides using the key-shaped cautery we mentioned before;
and if we perform the cautery in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will provide greater assistance.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and feeble from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then apply cauterization to the outer part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubis begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as a thumb.
and apply one cauterization outside the back, and two if you need them;
and let the cauteries be in the shape of a key as described earlier.
When the uterus is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: Then it is necessary to apply three cauterizations around the navel, as we said for the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations beside the back;
and let the cauterizations be made with a small nail, as we said.
When the viscous humors descend to the thigh joint, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and if the place of departure is found nearby, you must cauterize the patient on the thigh joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and cut in front of the area around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is within the circle;
And let the cauterizations be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, make three large ones from olive oil, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the others;
and treat it until it is healed.
of the pain in the hip When pain comes in the joint of the hip, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the section, but the treatment does not help, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick humors with foul pills or other similar good pills. After performing the cautery;
and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which one is such:
that you cauterize on the buttock three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them deep and large, and there should be between each cautery a space as thick as two fingers, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
Sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on top of the buttock, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the hip;
but do it in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire hip, and all the nerves are burned.
And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or to the leg.
And if it comes up to the thigh and the leg, place two cauterizations where the patient says the pain is, and one above the ankle four digits on the left side;
and let the cauterizations be circular, and burn the thickness of the nerve;
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to three or four fingers below the foot or near the instep, cauterize where they feel the pain at a point called "three" or "four"; And if necessary, do more to it;
And if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, do a cautery with the cutellaire or circular cautery, and be very careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave it so long as to burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the entire leg became swollen, as well as the foot, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout. After a belly treatment from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in each one according to this method.
And the wise ones said about the cautery of the hip, of which this is the manner, make it such that at the head it is as thick as a date seed, or a little less, and let it be intermittent, from one interval to the other with a space of the size of a lentil.
and let the interstices be covered on both sides, and let them also be like knots, and there should be one iron handle well made;
and this is the form:
And heat it until it is all red and sparks fly, and then place it upon the box of the diseased thigh, and turn it over onto the healthy side.
and let the patient undergo one cautery session and then leave it for three days; and then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after treating it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we use this cautery little because of his fear regarding it, and if we see little who uses it;
and yet this is one of the good cauteries, which can be tolerated by those who endure it, and where it applies.
The cautery of burning medicine is such that you make the instrument with grids in which the margin of the port descends, and it should be made of brass or iron with one side long, and at the height have two edges, and between each have the thickness of a finger. and let them be open on both sides and join together according to this form:
After place the hip joint of the patient lying on his sound side, and then put your hand much upon the hip joint; Then pour between the two circles of the hot iron which has been heated in the fire one cup, and let it stay for an hour of time, and allow the patient to feel the heat and burning.
For it causes chapping just as fire does;
And when the chapping has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip with a gentle iron, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until that which is black from the scalding is gone; and let him remain for three days so that pus may drain;
and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make one instrument that reaches according to what you have done on the hip similarly;
and this is the method of making it warm, and I have written it in the treatise on the preparation of medicines. Take alkaline substances and quicklime, equal parts of each, and grind them together, then put them in a new pot. where there is a small hole to allow the point of a razor to enter;
where there is a small hole to allow the point of a razor to enter; and place on that pot another pot well sealed, and put alkaline substances and heat it with something gentle on top, until there is one layer of powder above the powders you have carefully prepared in your hand;
And let it remain thus until the water descends with fever and chills, then take all that water and pour it over hot coals and alkali as before.
And then it will be very severe fever and is treated with various medical practices and cauterizations of other limbs.
For it performs another task like fire, and there are other medicines with which one can effectively cauterize the thigh, such as testicle juice and honey of anacardium mixed together with coals and soap.
And Galien tells us of a cure where a noble was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic nerve, and he praises it much, and says that no other treatment was done, and that he was healed in one attempt when this cure was performed, and he bathed as he teaches hereafter.
And instruct in this manner that you take green and fresh litharge and dry it, and grind it much with a little grease, and apply it to the thigh, the leg, or wherever the pain is located, and bind it.
and leave for three hours and by the amount that the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then make him enter the bath until his body is slightly refreshed, and have him enter the bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
And you must know that no one should use a cautery with such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hair, it helps greatly;
and the cauterization should be done in such a manner. Take wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe and the next one, which is called foscile.
After taking dry goat hair, hold it over fire until it turns to embers, and place it on the wool, leaving it until it turns black;
and do it again in the same way, and continue doing so until you think by sense that it reaches up to the thigh, and the pain is ceased;
And this kind of cautery is called "goat cautery".
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or impact or from excessive bloodletting, or from substances spread out cold, none of these cases are suitable for cauterization, except for one who suffers from it due to an influx of cold matter.
It is necessary after the patient has been cleansed with foul pills or other similar remedies, to apply three lines of incisions on the back where the pain resides, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure;
and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery which is called "points";
and if you wish, make three or four cauteries according to the middle-sized nail-shaped cautery in this form:
This illness often comes to young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have difficulty lying down and fear; And you find in the last spine of the back and in our appearance which comes above the other spines.
When you see this and wish to treat it, cauterize with the fire cautery according to this form. So that the cautery affects each part of the spine equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with the pricking cautery in two lines or three, and let the points be close to each other.
After treating the area until it is healed as we have said, and be careful not to cauterize in a joint that is near a nerve.
Of the pain of the joints
When joint pain is caused by moisture spread throughout each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which doctors call "podagra" properly, and when it is due to cold causes and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in such a manner:
Make the cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be in the shape of an olive according to this form:
And if there is a need to cauterize on the sole of the foot, then make the cauterization as one calls it "point" across the entire area. And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, then make cauterizations on each knee III cauterizations or IV of each part, making all the cauterizations olive-shaped;
and if you need more, do more, but do not let your hand stray beyond the point where the hair of the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, let the administrator apply the cautery that we have mentioned in our chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then make poultices around the wrists two lines long;
and if any pain remains in the fingers, then make poultices on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come to the hips or to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and proper medicines.
For if you provide good care and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
When rupture occurs in the groin, and the testicles descend to the thighs and this is new, then it is necessary that when you see it and need to treat it, he should not eat at all that day; and that he uses things that empty the belly so that the feces descend from his belly;
after making him sit between your hands on his back, and instructing him to keep still until the eyes are fixed, and reset them with your fingers, and cut from under the fracture over the bone of the thumb, and make a mark that resembles half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
until it is white and until sparks fly from it. Then reset the eyes to their place; and the minister keeps his hand on it so that they do not return backward;
And work well on the patient's thighs, and place under him one cushion and another over his thighs, and one under his buttocks which will hold the hands;
then place the cautery on the mark with your whole hand, and hold it straight until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the eye does not burst when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that the patient does not die because of it, or suffer other harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations for children be subtle according to their measure, and for adults also large according to their measure;
after three days, treat the site of the cauterization with butter until the burn is gone;
after that, treat with other ointments until he is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well sealed;
and it is necessary that his nursing periods be prolonged so that his eyes do not protrude when he tries to go into rooms.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, give him a well-made bandage, and let him use it for another forty days;
And let him have good rest, so that he does little work and guard against excessive drinking and eating, and speaking too loudly;
And when he follows this instruction, he is completely healthy.
And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in his chapter.
When ruptures occur in other areas and are noticeable, and you wish that they do not grow larger, apply a cautery according to their size, and let one-third of the skin be burned. after the treatment as we have said;
and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
but first mark the place and draw a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and then carefully apply the cautery in between.
But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
Of ancient pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being injured, and that pain persists for a long time, and the cure through medicine is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with a cautery called "points," and the cauterization should follow the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and its pain.
If he is well from the first cautery, it is good;
if that is the case, restart another cautery on that one, because such a custom exists that it must change to the next closest member, so you must perform the cauteries until the patient is well.
The illness is sometimes aided by cautery with great assistance, especially the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you see that it needs to be cauterized, take care if the disease is in its beginning stages, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and neither stop nor delay, and if you fear that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then perform V cauteries on the head: I place one at the back of the head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the occipital;
and leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the bone, and until the bark comes out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape;
and cauterize above the joint according to its position in front.
And if the rash is spread everywhere; and if it appears clearly, you must cauterize with the cauterizations we have mentioned on the head, one cauterization near the nose, two cauterizations on the neck vertebrae, six cauterizations on the spine, one large cauterization on the buttocks and another nearby, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the heel so you do not burn them;
and sometimes a person makes a cautery on the bone of the thumb, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that the more cauterizations you perform, the more help you give, and it benefits the patient;
and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already completely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron.
After treatment, apply flour mixed with honey to the area and other treatments until it is healed.
When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it does not heal, then I apply cauterizations on the limb according to its size and length;
and let the cauterizations penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin; then treat it with ointments until it heals.
And sometimes cauterization is done at the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed;
and in any case, do not intervene unless one is knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and medical remedies are of no use, then cauterize with a cautery slightly deep, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes.
then dress it with flour of barley and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and one part each of dove blood and lark blood; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and expose it to the air until it is healed.
the treatment of a carbuncle with cauterization
When a carbuncle begins to appear and you wish to stop its progress, then cauterize it with a circular cauterizing tool all around the edge of the carbuncle.
And always the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer;
and still this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen sometimes.
And a more prudent thing is to cauterize around it with the cautery called "circulus," as we have said regarding various types of cauteries.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it delays death either because of the excess it causes or due to the age of the patient when they are infirm (that is, too old), and there is little blood, or due to time; and you wish to hasten its end: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by pricking; after leaving it thus. For she will hasten to kill.
And if you wish to pierce it completely with the cautery, heat the cautery as follows:
And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and make the cautery such that the patient feels it externally in such a way that the course of the corruption is alleviated.
After the treatment until he is completely healed.
There is another kind of disease called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a consumption of the limb, for it consumes the limbs as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see this disease in a place that can withstand the cautery together with fire, then heat the cauterizing irons both small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the illness;
after you cauterize it from all sides until you reach all the corruption, and leave nothing of it remaining, so that everything that is corrupted be removed.
And then leave it for three days, and put on the places that were cauterized, crushed with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all of the corruption.
After the treatment with ointments that generate flesh.
And if after three days you see no healthy flesh grow, that is good;
and if not, then restart the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted areas.
And this meal has sometimes been cured by medication instead of a fire cautery;
but still, the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already described the treatment with medication in the section; take it when you need it.
of blisters that come to the feet Many times it happens that on the feet from the outside a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a swollen thing that impedes the foot.
And the cauterization for this disease is according to two methods. That is to say, fire cauterization, and hot water cauterization.
The fire cautery is such that you heat it until it is as hot as a feather of woodpigeon, and it should be made of good iron to the size that it can penetrate like a nail from all sides, and there should be fine edges;
after placing it very hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and let him remain this way for three days until he begins to discharge pus; then apply a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the area with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
And if they turn outward from the body, and this often happens in the hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery to them; and it is done in this manner: take a chain of iron or steel, or a sparrow's foot, and place it on the nail and althea leaves, which are used to remove warts; and place the chain so that it covers all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand firmly, and press with your hand by turning so that the edge of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and then find the warm moist way deep until the root;
and let the patient suffer a little from the bite of the warm water for an hour; then leave it like that, and it will uproot itself completely from its roots.
Do this one after another, until you have examined all those who are on the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
When someone shivers from cold of nerves, or from quartan fever or other causes, you must make them four cauterizations, or place one cauterization between each spine; And for the cautery on the foot, and above the stomach for the olive-shaped cautery;
let the trembling continue, and hasten to treat the cold disease.
At times, baths or foul pus-filled blisters appear on the surface of the body, which come from large corrupted substances.
when they first appear, it is necessary to make a cauterization on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery from the branch of myrtle, whose tip is touched by fire, or from a long root of artemisia, or the lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they do not grow anymore from then on, but the excesses from which they come are broken off, and they are healed;
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there is a great loss of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound coming from outside, or from incising an abscess, or from cauterizing a limb, and similar things; and it is very difficult to stop.
And whenever this happens to someone, hasten to place your thumb over the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is stilled under your thumb, and no more oozes out;
then put the olive cauterizing irons in the fire, several small and large ones until they are all red;
Then take I, whether large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery runs, and apply the cautery on that vein where you hold your fire, and keep the cautery there until the blood is congealed.
And if it spurts out when you lift your thumb from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is clotted;
and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
and note that when blood flows from the artery, one cannot properly clot it directly when the artery is large, unless it is done by one of the four methods we have mentioned: by cauterization, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by applying medications that have the power to staunch blood; and let it be tied and compressed appropriately.
Who will remove the smell by tightly wrapping cloths or placing burning things upon it, or other similar things, if there is no benefit when done otherwise.
And if this happens to someone and there is no physician or medicine available, he should place his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until it stops bleeding over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the thumb, but apply cold water frequently and very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped;
and have them seek out those who are needed for cauterizations and medications.
We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which it is necessary to use a fire cautery or hot medicine, and the occasions and causes and instruments and forms of the cauteries;
and I have placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will proceed in this same way in this chapter so that what one seeks may be found more easily.
And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die as a result.
And I warn you that you must not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for treatment. There are those who become so distressed with their illness that they change slightly due to the madness they find in their sickness, and because of the severity of their suffering; and one must be afraid of these.
And from these, there are those who gain understanding and say: â€œwait, I am curedâ€; and the illness is severe.
It is not right for you to agree with those who come to you with this manner, but place more importance on your honor than your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely regarding what you are certain of, and from which you can gain respect and praise;
and use prognosis and indications in the treatment of your patients for whom recovery may be achieved;
and this will help you acquire a good reputation, and glory, and praise-worthy memory.
Very dear child, Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to breathe in the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Now I have ordained this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before the chapter on cauterizations, which I have discussed from head to foot, so that you may more easily find what you need.
Know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the mother constricts the child's head too forcefully;
and sometimes it comes for reasons that are not known.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those whom I have seen it hastened death; and for this reason it seems to me that I should leave such treatments.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not support it;
and the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture is collected beneath the bone above the diaphragm, between the heart and the bone;
and the procedure is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should cut a wide incision in the head;
and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture can drain;
and here is the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is greater, and the abscess larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is outside the bone, and you see the seams of the head open on each side, and when you press inside with your hand the fluid jumps forward, and this does not return to its place: it is necessary that you cut three incisions in the head according to this method:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture completely. After cleaning the incisions of cloths and powders, put wine and oil on them, and leave it like this until the fifth day;
then loosen it, and treat the wound with dressings and ointments, and clean the head evenly, and give the patient dried meat that contains little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
And another way of incising is to look where the abscess is clearly open, and where the pus is collected;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut there where the abscess is open, and where the pus is collected, and incise according to what you are able;
and be careful not to cut the artery; and if blood flows freely, so that the patient dies from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
When someone is afflicted with a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or at the nose, and the illness is longstanding, and medical treatment does no good, then the last remedy is to use cauterization, cutting the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you are to cut the veins, that the patient lie on his back; after which rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then have the patient pull his neck against the entire cloth; then look where the veins lie, and their locations are behind the ears, and they are placed there;
then mark the locations clearly, then cut both veins with a sharp spatula on either side, until the vein reaches the bone, and do this along the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel below the artery and cut above it, cutting also across as you should through.
And when the vein is cut, blood will continually spout upwards.
And if the artery does not become visible to touch, measure a space of three fingers wide, then mark clearly and cut until it reaches the bone;
and the amount of blood that should be let out is six cyats, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can tolerate, and the fullness of the artery;
then examine the wound: if there remains a sharp point of the bone, cut it so that abscesses do not form, then cleanse the wound and bandage it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
For migraine When chronic migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and an old insane sore and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical care and all this does no good, then we cut open the arteries in the temples and apply cautery, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient should place their fingers in the hair at their temples and feel for the artery there, as it beats clearly, though it may not be easily felt except in some people who are too cold;
And if it is responded to, the patient should compress their neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and apply hot water to the area until the artery appears clearly. Then take the spatula of which this is the form: Then peel the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then lift it up towards the incisions, and carefully separate it from the tissues around each part;
And if the artery is fine, then turn it with the tip of the hook, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of two fingers. For if it is not cut, the blood does not flow completely throughout.
And draw out blood from six places, up to three times;
And if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that no corruption comes before the healing of the wound, and to prevent the flow of blood;
Then cut away the excess that is between the two ties at that same moment, and then, if you wish, apply the cautery with a hot iron until the flesh is cut through;
and this is the safest procedure if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm constitution. For cauterization helps to finish off moisture: for it is of greater help against moisture.
For the extraction of arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place well-made tents on top.
and when they are released, ensure they are treated with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and with tents until they are healed.
and if the artery is cut as much as you work on it, hasten to cauterize where you place vitriol and hold it with your hand until the blood stops. and if you do not have the necessary tools present, apply your hand to the area until the blood cools, and rinse the area with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it as is appropriate.
There should be one thick space between the two knives, and then when you have marked the two places with a needle, place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let them be separate between the two edges because they should not be joined throughout with this cautery;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And for the one who is weaker and lighter in the extraction of the artery, you should cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery on two sides, but let the cuts be well apart to preserve their heat longer. For when the instrument is too cold, it holds less of its heat.
of tears When the tears from the eyes descend from veins that are on top of the head due to heat, and it does not benefit from any medical treatment you apply, and you see the face of the patient redden, and feel a trembling in the forehead as if from shivering; And when they are swollen and moist so that the hairs on the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary. And the ancients called it "contusion cure," and it is that you make the patient lie down who has this illness, then shave the hair on his forehead, and then make three incisions on the forehead evenly along its length;
And the ancients called it "contusion cure," and it is that you make the patient lie down who has this illness, then shave the hair on his forehead, and then make three incisions on the forehead evenly along its length; and let one of the incisions be in the middle of the forehead going down to the nose, and the other two on either side above the eyes, and be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides above the eyes;
and move your hand away from the connection of the two jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across;
and prepare a piece of sponge and much cloth to wipe the blood, then place the spatula sharp on both sides as follows:
from the incision which is above the temple to the second incision; and skin all the flesh which is between the two incisions to the surface that is on the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatula. Insert into the first groove the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very well cutting on one side, and on the other side it is smooth, not cutting, and this is its form:
And place the cutting edge towards the flesh of the heart, and the smooth side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle groove.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it reaches the flesh, and then do likewise in the middle incision until the other side;
Then draw out the blood evenly, and press the area to expel the retained blood;
Then place a pad of old cotton in each incision, and cover them with cloths moistened in wine and oil and pitch, and guard against the formation of pus-filled abscesses;
And on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply a generous poultice of vinegar, then treat it with an ointment called basilicon mixed with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until he is healed.
When someone frequently suffers from a narrow cataract, and you see the pupils dilated and small, with weakened vision, and the irises burned; and the hair falls out, and on the head it forms with pain like fever, and the patient sneezes; then you can tell by these symptoms that those matters and that catarrh do not come from just one vein, and if the physician treats what is there, this is it.
And it is that you instruct the patient to lie with their back against their forehead, then make a large incision across the forehead, and another one from the middle of the head. And start from the left temple fissure to the right temple, and let the incision go until it reaches the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then separate between the two lips of the fissure and put old cotton and linen strips there; Then bind on top of it cloths moistened in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess;
When it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then care for it with substances that stimulate growth.
In such a manner: Take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and administer it to these wounds to stimulate flesh growth throughout.
of the congestion of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: For seeds, for beasts, for stones from mines, or similar things such as iron; for seeds, such as beans, peas; for flowing substances, such as water and urine and similar things.
When a stone or any other substance that does not belong in the ear falls into it and does not grow inside the ear, place the ear towards the sun.
If you see the stone, then drip some drops of violet oil or cumin oil, then proceed with the extraction; and make them sneeze with something spicy, and plug their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and cover the ear above.
Much fire comes from this treatment;
and if it does not come with fire, then the subtle pinching method of extraction is used, which is described here:
If it jumps with fire during the pinching, that is good;
if not, then use the subtle needle of fine manipulation for extraction;
and if it does not jump with that, then make a thread of silk and insert the end of the thread into the ear canal firmly, and plug what is around the thread with soft wax so that no air can enter along the thread; then pull it forcefully with fire, as it often responds to the fire as we have said;
and if it does not come forth in such a manner, then take glue as birds use, and place some instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a little cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and draw it out.
And if it does not come out from all the things we have said, then hurry to cut the ear as for an abscess so that blood may flow and relieve the spasm;
and the manner of the incision is that you first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein, and draw out blood according to the measure of his strength, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear into the fat or dependent part; and let the incision be as crescent-shaped, so that you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it quickly into your mouth;
and continue the treatment until he is well.
And if this grain is inside and it swells, then proceed with its removal;
and if it cannot come out, then proceed with the application of this subtle poultice according to this form: and administer an incision of that tumor.
But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to moisture from the ear, until you have done it many times;
then extract it with fine forceps and a suction device, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In acute cases where it falls into the ear, the patient should use sneezing powders first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And lie down on that same side where the pain is. If it discharges because of that, it is good.
if not, take many stones according to the length of your thumb, light and easy, and heat them a little in the fire; and place them in one or a hole of his ear, and let it come out from another part of his foot, and press with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this with stone on stone until the water is completely expelled, and thus it will be completely expelled;
and if you wish, take some reed, and insert one end of it in the ear, and burn the other end with fire until the softer part of the reed is burned;
Then repeat on other joints until the fluid is completely expelled, as we have said regarding stones.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section.
but if it is large enough to be felt, then treat with the extraction using forceps; and it is the lightest thing to remove that can be in the ear.
In the extraction of live worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section and in treating distillations, and if the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to look at the ear in the sun: If any worms are apparent, remove them with subtle forceps, and if none are found, take the chain from which this form is made:
And make it narrow below and wide above. And insert the most delicate end into the ear according to the patient's pain level, then gradually proceed with the chain entirely; Do this repeatedly until all the worms exit.
And if they do not come out, plug around the chain with cotton as I mentioned for stones;
and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective against worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations;
and then let your oils and medicines drip into the ear with all this equipment, as you see from this form: And whether it is made of silver or bronze, make it narrow with small openings, and cover it above to drip through;
and to press inside for the drip, use a well-made metal tool for this purpose, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap it around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you wish of your medicines into the tube, and place the tube in the ear;
then insert into the wrapped part of the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is dripping at the bottom of the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and let the distilled potion be heated over fire as one would distil it into the ear; and make sure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
of the congestion of the ears
Some children are born with no hole in their ears;
and this same thing happens to adults due to an obstruction in the ear, or foreign matter inside the ear, and these obstructions sometimes occur deep within the ear, so that one cannot see them;
and sometimes the liquid comes out of the hole, and one can see it clearly.
That which comes from deep within and cannot be seen requires serious treatment in many conditions, and for that which is visible, you should place the patient's ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the appearance of suppuration, then perform this entire procedure as described:
And let it be sharp and cutting in front and entirely smooth behind so that it does not damage the ear;
if the suppuration is from flesh inside or on the ear, hold it with fine forceps and scrape gently until all the affected tissue is removed.
And if the obstruction is in the ear, take a fine, light scraper and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it in the flesh of the ear.
If you feel the waxing of the ear where the patient feels pain in the hearing, pierce it lightly, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear;
then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the opening, and apply it with Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until the wound is sealed, then take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on top;
and if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary to remove the tent and apply another tent moistened in cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling subsides; Then treat him until he is healthy.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place them on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the treatment of distillations.
This almond that comes from the eyes when they are moist and dry, you should stretch them with pliers and forceps, and cut off a piece from their roots; then place vitriol powder over the site.
And if it does not peel off, cauterize it with a fine lentil-shaped cautery, and after the incision, it will shed.
and they often heal, when nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the hailstones Often come onto the eyes things that seem like hail in form and hardness, and for this reason is this illness called "hailstorm," and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below the eye. the work is such:
the work is such: take care if the hailstorm moves from one side to the other, and it is an easy thing to know;
then make an incision, then gently scrape the skin of each part, then take it with forceps, and cut it.
if you cannot cut it without piercing the eye slightly, do not worry about harming the patient;
And if the wound is large, sew it up with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, do not force it, for the ointment will heal it quickly and generate flesh.
And if the grain is inside the ear towards the upper part, turn it over with paper, and extract the grain with tweezers, and grasp and press from both sides;
and if the paper is distant due to an incision, it does not matter;
and when the grain is removed, wash the eye with salt water, and treat the area where flesh will regenerate until the patient is healed.
of the grease of the eyes Exinach is a grease that forms on the membranes of their eyes, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it greatly pains their eyes, and they develop catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes;
and because of this they lie down on their backs immediately, and sleep, and their membranes below their eyebrows are wet, inflamed, and covered with the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the method of treatment is that the patient places their head on your shoulder;
and then take a piece of linen and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach in each part, then place it over them; and press both sides, so that the heel is assembled within the circle;
then cut in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula to make a narrow incision, and let it not be larger than the wound made when opening a vein;
and cut the skin deeply until you reach the heel; and in various positions, the heel comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Extract it then as one piece of torn cloth between your two hands outward, and move your hand left and right until it is spread out;
And guard that you do not insert into the fissure, so as not to reach all the way to the eyeball, and do not injure it.
And if the excimer does not open at the beginning of the fissure, gradually widen the fissure slightly until it opens.
Then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths with oil and water, and place them on the area, and bandage it.
And there are such people who grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then treat until he is healthy.
And if he comes to the place of an abscess, treat with poultices soothingly until he is healthy.
of the hairs of the eyelids When hairs grow attached to parts other than where nature intended, and they are inflamed, they harm the eyes and cause various illnesses such as habitual tears and inflammation of the eyelids and conjunctiva, leading to damage to the eyes.
and the treatment follows four methods: or by cautery together with fire, or by a dry medicine as described in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by canthars, as I will say.
It is necessary to place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand;
if it is turned, that is good; if not, then insert a needle along the entire line above; and do this at the edge of the paper near where the hair grows among these hairs, and draw the thread above across the entire paper, then turn it with the razor;
Then they cut into the part below the skin, between the hairs attached, across the entire spatulated area from the large gland to the small.
Then extract the thread, and place below the skin a small pad of cotton and linen, then mark on the skin a pattern, like the leaf of myrtle, and in all ways it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you wish to raise the skin which is planned for.
And if there is someone who needs to cut a large quantity of the skin according to how the skin has been softened;
Then they cut across the entire spatulated area along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the large gland to the small; And let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the lancet into one of the two angles of the heart, then shave it all.
Then sew the two lips together with a needle and fine linen thread along one seam, wipe away the blood, and apply something sticky to the excess threads over both eyebrows if you wish to do so.
And if not, then do not worry about it, leave the seam and threads until three or four days.
Then treat the wound without sutures with drying and binding agents, for the skin rises suddenly at the edge of the wound and binds together, but the suture is slow to heal (as the ancients say), and these treatments are done without fear. and there is another method:
and there is another method: and it is that you should cauterize the stone in the shape of a leaf like that of myrtle, as we have described, with three ounces removed according to the form which is shown here:
Then cut those which rise above the small parts evenly according to the shape which is here:
And if you cannot hold the tongs and the objects are not even, take a needle with thread and place it in the shape; and place another thread near the large artery, and the second thread near the small one, and tie them together evenly;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have cauterized, as we have described, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed;
And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with plaster and similar soothing ointments;
And sometimes the hair on the stone is converted:
It is necessary that you use what we have said about incising;
but the suturing in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of chains follows this form: and it is that you convert the stone and cut into it as I have said, and then make two chains by art, and two fine threads as long as the stone and as wide as the spatula is; and cut at two heads from two sides where you hold the threads;
then gently join one to the other on what protrudes from the eye's membrane, and pull apart the two cords from each side firmly; and leave it like this for some days, and the skin that is pulled tight will die, blacken, and form pus until it falls off on its own.
If it delays, cut it with force, then treat it until it is healed;
and when the wound is closed, and if the membrane is raised, the hairs will no longer prick;
and this is the shape of the two cannulas that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
the work is such that you take a fine needle and pass a thin and fine silk thread through it; then join the heads and tie them carefully together, and let the length of the threads be one palm;
then arrange another fine silk thread in the sheath briefly, and tie the ends of the thread gently;
then have the patient place their head in your care;
and place it near the sun so that the work is well lit, for this is delicate and fine work; then insert the needle into the sheath at the root of the adjacent hair, and pierce through the membrane quickly as you draw it over the natural hair;
Then remove the hair up to the wound, and insert that hair into the wound if there is one or two or three or more;
Then pull out your hand until the hairs come completely out of the wound with the natural hair.
And if the wound is deep and the hairs do not come out with them, then you will probe the wound from inside with all the thread you have inserted until the wound comes out of the opening above and you can see it with your eyes;
then pull out the wound and the thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair grows back in its place and flesh grows over;
And if the hairs are short, accompany one long hair with natural cheek hairs, and raise it along with those you leave, until it is raised and then lift it.
from the pus of the eye When this disease called "aleacrati" or corruption comes to the eye, there are two ways it can occur:
one naturally, and one unnaturally.
And it happens by sudden injury, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
And the manner of treating it is that you split that seam, and separate the edges, and place linen tents inside, and keep it raised until it heals;
and it is not appropriate to use in the treatment of it things that dry out and constrict. For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before;
but use things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and boil the water of atriplex and flax seeds, and apply ointment made from melted cerate in some oil, and wrap it with a cloth, and treat it with this.
And the goal of your treatment is to ensure that it does not heal according to its former shape;
and these treatments we have mentioned are nothing but methods to prevent this illness from returning to its former shape.
This disease which is called "axacrati" in truth, and it has its nature and accidents.
The accident comes from a wound and a cut and a cautery and similar things;
and the method of the work is such that you take a needle, which has a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left temple to the right, so that the thread goes through two parts of the flesh;
then stretch the skin above completely over the needle, and cut with a spatula that is one span wide. And if the appearance of the membrane returns as it should, it is good;
and if not, then take a scraper and place it in the cut, and turn the membrane, and make two cuts within the membrane;
and let the head of the shoulder be in the two grooves at the two corners of the incision that you have made, and make them form an angle so that when they are put together, the shape is like the letter called "X" in Greek;
then remove the flesh according to the amount that his ribs are sharp underneath, of him who is under the paper, then join the two separated parts and sew them together with a thread of wool;
then treat him with the remedies we have mentioned that soften and draw out, until he is healed.
And if the illness comes from a wound or suture or cauterization, then you must cut an incision cleanly below the hairs of the paper, as was described before; Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the treatment according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare remedies with all their power as if to restore the figure to its natural form;
and the patient himself, according to what is necessary in treatment and instruments in various situations.
When this adhesion occurs in some people such that the membrane above is stuck to the white of the eye, and they cannot move or perform their natural actions, then you should insert the tip of a razor below the membrane, and lift it up;
and place the cautery pieces, so that you cut what is attached to the delicate speculum, which should not be too sharp or too cutting, so that the patient cannot tolerate a speculum that is too sharp and might injure the eye;
and let your incision, where you peel off the assembly, be gentle, so that the membrane returns according to its natural form;
and when the entire assembly is healed, they sometimes place salt water in the eye, and rinse it with sweet water, and use poultices;
then place between the membrane and the eye a tent of linen, and put on the eye wool moistened abundantly with egg; And after the third day, use a collar and binding until he is healed.
Know that the nail grows in two ways: it is nervous and resembles the hard skin surface, and another that is not nervous, but resembles frozen white moisture, such that when one touches it with iron and intends to treat it with tweezers, it cannot be done;
and both appearances begin near the large tear duct and grow little by little until they cover the entire vision and light and movement of the eye.
And the method of incision is that the patient places their head in your lap, then you work on their eyes; and lift the paper with your hand, then trim the nail at the edges of thin lining, and stretch it above; then take a needle, and put on it horsehair, or cowhair, or ox hair, and strong thread; and double the point of the needle a bit and insert it into the nail, and pierce through with the entire needle, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it above, and shave all around the edge of the nail where the almond is and attach silk to the hair up to the tip, then trim the remainder at the root of the fingernail with the subtle spatula and small forceps, leaving the natural flesh of the nail bed so that through the incision the usual flow of tears does not come forth;
and sometimes the nail adheres only to the bone, and with a thread, as we have said; then the skin is stripped off all of the spatumile, which is how it appears:
And be careful that the spatumile does not touch the delicate flesh and tear it, and that the probe is not pierced;
and after the incision, sprinkle a bit of ground sulfur and a mixture made from litharge into the eye, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it is healed.
And if the nail is not loose and you cannot insert a needle, and the probe cannot enter, this condition of the nail is often treated with various medicines;
and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you wish to cut them, let the patient's eye guide you, and take a spatula lightly and quickly according to this form: And lift the eyelid gently from above, and if you see it become slightly smaller and the reason for concern is apparent, then drip from your mouth into the eye a lotion made of litargire and red copper oxide ground fine, and plug the eye until the next day;
If something is contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then stop, and treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume work as before, until it is well.
then repeat the procedure on the other eye according to this same method until it is completely treated.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid harms the eye severely, then suspend it to the nail, and cut part of it but not entirely so that no more tears come from the wound;
Then instill into the eye a red lotion made of litharge.
In some people's eyes, red flesh sometimes grows, covering the pupil and restraining it on the membranes, turning it outward, and it looks like a white rose;
and the procedure is that the patient places their head on your hand, then you work on their eyes, and with suitable hooks, remove all that flesh, and support it with strength;
Then cut the first layer of flesh, and keep cutting with a scalpel until the end, and be careful not to damage the eye during the procedure;
and let the incision be made with the spatula that we mentioned in the nail cutting procedure and with small efforts similar to those used when removing a splinter, as the form following this chapter demonstrates;
And when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then apply oil made from crushed seeds or pour red colic water and similar corrosive medicines, and place on top a piece of cotton soaked in egg white, so that it is secure against a hot abscess;
And if anything remains and the blood rises to the surface, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the hot abscess with things that calm it;
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus you should proceed when flesh is applied in the oil by this method.
However, it is necessary that you lighten the treatment of each weak eye according to the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work with iron;
and do not place your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb can tolerate the work.
Blood vessels are red and covered over the eye, and they impair vision in their work and weaken the eye all day.
Therefore, first you must check if the eye, in which there is inflammation, is protruding, and there is no other illness except for the inflammation; then treat it in the following manner:
instruct the patient to place their head on your lap, then suspend those veins along the entire arm according to your wisdom, and let the arms be delicate and subtle in this manner:
And let two lancets be at different levels on the body according to this form:
then as you treat the veins gently, wipe away the blood hour after another, until you see the veins recede from the eye;
And guard that you do not strike the eye with the points of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not miss any veins;
And when you have done this, then drip into the eye green and red collyrium to dissolve what remains of the cataract.
And if you do not have the power to collect all of this at that hour, then apply a poultice on the eye with things that calm the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and there is assurance of a warm abscess, then resume according to this method until it is healed;
and this is the form of the forces:
The physician calls this type of ulcer "arissati":
when you treat it with cautery and hot medicine as I have said before, and it does not heal, then there is pus inside that you must cut open where it should burst, and drain all the moisture that is inside until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then you should remove it using all the instruments of which this is the form;
and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made of iron to fit the head roundly, and should be pointed like a file as shown in the present form:
And place on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is resolved;
and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medications.
if the tissue is sealed and flesh grows there, and the body of the bone is sealed, and remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew and is not inflamed or infected, then you know that it is healed.
if not, then there is another condition to bring the fistula to the navel opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with an instrument and with wet medicines, and when it is uncovered take one forefinger according to this form, and let the tip of the iron be at three angles, and the shaft should taper until the top as shown here:
Then place it on the bone near the cheekbone, and move your hand away from the eye one inch, then turn the probe until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it when he holds his hand on his neck;
and then restore the place with dry medications as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the places, remove the matter from the neck; it is easier for the patient.
When the eye is fully open and there is no disturbance or reduction in vision, then you must bind the patient;
then heal it, then apply cupping vessels or suck with a horn without striking to draw out the impurity, then place on the eye a dressing made of acacia and aloes and incense and myrrh, and then extract the eye, and cover with plasters and cloths;
And the method of the bandages is that you take soft cloths, and fold each in four, and then place one over another according to the quantity that the eyes require;
then apply a hard bandage on top, and reuse the suction cups to suck without injuring;
then remove the suction cups and leave the eye held tight day and night, and if the bindings loosen, you must hold them tightly again;
then remove the binding after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good;
if not; Repeat the plaster and the cloths and the ligature and the cupping until he is well.
of the tearing of a woven cloth When disruption comes in the uvular membrane, it becomes open, and appears as black spots like resin seeds, and is terrifying to see;
then if you wish to cut it, the procedure is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part below until you reach the one above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the lacrimal bone; and you pierce there, and leave the first needle according to its position;
then cut the area of the double thread and tie a part of the uvula around it, and tighten well, then extract the needle and place on the eye wool moistened in abundance with egg;
and leave it until the scab falls off with the skin, then treat the eye with comforting remedies until the wound is healed;
and sometimes the wound is restrained by the scab in each part with a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eye shows a great appearance, then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes in perfect shape for the eye, and draw out the white moisture and let the eye descend, and it will enter soon;
then extract it until it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a boil that assembles in the eye, resembling water descending, and it is not actually water.
And the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit upon a prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the brow come up to your eyes; then let it be fixed, and do not let it descend and let the light be unobstructed, so that the patient may see things as they usually would;
and if it does not descend apart, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the brow is not prepared as we have said.
seat the patient between your hands, then take a fine speculum and make an incision through the corneal membrane at the junction of the conjunctiva and the cornea, until the brow rises;
And when it comes out, drop hot honey mixed with water into the eye, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey, then treat it further until it is healed.
for eye waters We have described the appearances of the waters in the division, and what is necessary for piercing them; act according to the health situation.
It is necessary for you to seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and press firmly around the healthy eye;
then place the paper over the eye with your left hand if the eye is left, or with your right hand if the eye is right;
Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or with your left hand, if the eye is right;
Then place the point of the instrument next to the cornea by the thickness of a hair on that white part of the eye near the inner corner, then insert the "almagda" instrument forcefully, and turn your hand until it pierces the white part of the eye, and feel when the almagda reaches an empty space;
and it is necessary that the length of the almagda be exactly equal to the space from the pupil to the end of the black part; and this is the crown of the eye;
you will see the bone through that membrane due to the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument up to where the fluid is, then express it out one way after another.
If the fluid descends now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting for a little while, if the fluid rises again, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly inserted and does not rise, then gently extract it by turning your hand bit by bit;
and then add a little drop of ruby essence to it, and lift the eye out from there. Then place over the eye plugs made of wool soaked in rose oil and beaten egg whites, and secure them with a healthy eye.
We, and those of our time, apply it mixed with a lot of beaten egg whites.
And if alum (a substance) cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are people who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is of this form:
And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make it delicate, then insert the instrument as we have said;
and at the completion of the work, prepare the patient for the doctor's arrival, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
and let him be still from all movements, and give him light foods, and do not let him move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition until the third day;
then untie him in the same dark house and test his sight, show him some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day;
and it is not appropriate to do this during the hour of treatment or immediately after incision, but you should delay it, because the fluid rises quickly.
If abscesses occur, that you should open the eye before the seventh day, and treat it with what alleviates abscesses;
and when it is alleviated, then open the eye and place a small piece of gold over it for some days, and let it be in a dark room.
And then leave the house gradually, and return to his normal activities;
and know that no disciple should intervene in this case. And one came to us who was from the Irach, who told us that in their country they practice a method called almagda for draining fluid, but still I have never seen anyone do this in our land, nor have I read about it in ancient books. And by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almonds, so that those who do not know them see them;
and they should be of fine silver: And let the heads of these be of the same fineness, and the rear in three acute angles.
Sometimes the new veins appear in various positions, some of which seem to have many legs like scorpions;
and there are some where the vein is enlarged and red in color, and below it there is a vein of good color. In the vein that is below and not enlarged, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
In the vein that is below and not enlarged, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and work his nostrils, and throw the splinter to those parts, and draw out the foreign object; then proceed as much as you can to support the subtle sharp angle from one side, until you know that the flesh has been entirely removed.
And if anything remains that cannot be cut, then scrape it with the finest instrument lightly, so that nothing remains. and if pus overflows from the abscess, then treat it as is appropriate;
and if these are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize until the pus is congealed and all the flesh is removed, then apply to the nose freely and with ease either water or wine. If the urine works, and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that he is healthy;
and if moisture does not reach as it should, know that there is flesh on the bone above, where the instrument cannot cut:
then it is necessary to insert a slightly thick linen thread, and tie it by hand, with about one space between each knot; and place the patient's head on the thread end as much as possible, and pull it through snuffing until it comes out inside the mouth;
and children often do this at school, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it;
Then hold the head that comes from the nape with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and pull them one after the other while keeping us who are in the thread.
Do this until you see that the worms have corrupted the flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before;
Do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh;
and then put a plug of lead in the nose for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying remedies, use them;
And this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, in which one distills oils and medicines through the nose:
And whether it is made of silver or brass, it should resemble an open lamp, like a chain, and the conduit should be similar.
And if you prefer, make a closed chain, and the instrument should be full for purging the head;
and it should have a handle at the top to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh over the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" is born in the head of the nose, and it grows until it becomes large, appearing as a visible object when looked at.
And for this reason it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and remove all hair, then place on it the cautery or burning medicine;
and if you delay cutting it until it is large, be wary if it is hard, of reddish color, and if the patient has poor sensation:
do not touch it with iron because it is a chronic abscess, for when you cut it even once, great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of a reddish color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then empty the patient of blood without fear, and treat the area with dry and binding substances.
Know that when a solution for continuity comes to one of these cartilage works, it is little use, except in some men.
It is therefore necessary, when this happens to anyone, to examine whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then sew the two edges together, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the edges are separated on both sides, you must cauterize all parts of their flesh until they bleed, then bring together the two edges with stitches, and press it tightly, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood, and grind incense; and apply a piece of hot or another adhesive plaster over the powders, and leave it until it sticks by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
The method of suturing is such that you bring together the edges: using needles, as we have said in the suturing of the abdomen; or using thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
In some people, there occurs in the lips an hard abscess, resembling grains of vesicles, smaller and larger;
then you must turn the lips inside out, and cut into each knot, and grasp it with forceps and excise in each part;
then apply the area after incising with broiled vitriol, until the blood is coagulated;
Then lift the cushion, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
Many times, flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus";
you must hold it with forceps, cut it at its root, and let the blood or pus flow;
then apply powdered vitriol or other astringent and drying powders to the area;
and if the flesh returns after cutting, which often happens, cut it again and cauterize it: it will not return after the cauterization;
Sometimes they are assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and unpleasant scales; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and worm-eaten, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the tooth becomes foul-smelling;
it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands, and place his head in your lap, and remove the teeth or the scales that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do for the blackness and the greenness, and the yellow and other stains, until they are clean;
and if what is there at the first reason is removed, it is good; if not, then start again from the second day and the third, until you have completely reset it;
and know that the teeth require various forms of instruments to reset them, according to what the work shows, because the instrument used to remove teeth has a different shape than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared for you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay pulling it as much as you can, for one must not do this readily; For it is a very high substance until one has no excuse for scraping.
Then when the patient is forced to pull the tooth, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth causing pain. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they believe it to be from a tooth, and they pull the good tooth; and the pain never leaves because of that tooth, until the bad one is extracted, for we have already seen this happen with these patients;
and when you are certain of the painful tooth, then it is necessary to scrape around the tooth thoroughly. Use plenty of spatinum to protect the gum on all sides;
then move it with your hands or with fine tweezers little by little until it is well loosened, then firmly secure the tweezers; And let the head of the patientâ€™s shoulder be between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After extract the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and push into each side gently, and move it as you have done before.
And if the tooth is pierced and decayed, you must fill it with cloths where the hole is; and if you grasp it gently with forceps so that it does not break when you pull;
and you must carefully work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be very careful that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and return to the patient because of the root's mischief greater pain than before.
And be careful that you do not act as the ignorant surgeons do, who in their haste and boldness sometimes break the tissue, and fail to achieve what we have described;
but they sometimes bring about a great illness due to the roots that remain, or because of the flesh that they tear, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is extracted, wash the area with wine or hellebore and salt;
and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply ground vitriol to the area;
and if that does not help, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments used to extract teeth first should have long points and thick handles, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth;
and these are the forms: And they should have thick parts so that they do not bend when extracting, and they should be made of well-crafted iron, and should have teeth to hold the teeth.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the hair, you should place cotton soaked in butter on it for one or two days until the area softens, then use pliers called "algefri," which makes the head appear like a bird's beak;
and they should be made inside like a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not wish to come out completely with these clamps, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say a scalpel, here is its form:
And let it be outside and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through this, it is good;
if not, then help with all the instruments, of which the forms follow hereafter:
And if one aids with this instrument that has two blades, of which here is its form: and other iron tools which are mentioned earlier in the rationale of teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large clamps, here is its form:
And let this instrument be such that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of bone are; and also other instruments, which are not counted;
and the wise masters subtle find by himself his instrument, according to what his work and the illness shows him, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of them; and if one breaks a little of the cartilage or other bones, it may rot, so he seeks among the instruments that are needed, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, of which here is the form:
And let them be large and well-made to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and remove it;
and then restore the place with medicines suitable for that, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, remove it entirely with this instrument:
When a tooth appears not according to its natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you must know if the tooth has grown after another tooth and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or smoothed:
then remove it; and if it is embedded with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here shown, and it resembles a small beak, and should be made of sharp iron at its tip:
And cut it bit by bit over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to move the other teeth, and if it appears that you can file it, then file it with a tool like this one shown here:
and it is also like the file used to make needles;
and file the tooth bit by bit over several easy days, so that it does not move until it falls out;
then the surface should be smooth at the end for any grinder, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, it must be filed down until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue nor impair speech.
When the teeth in front are loose, either due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without them moving, and you have treated them with constricting medications, but it is ineffective;
then they must be restrained with a gold wire, because silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never moves;
and let the thread neither be too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and tie it double between two healthy teeth, then place the head of the needle between the bad teeth, whether there is one or more, carefully until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side; then restart the wrapping until you reach the part where you began, and withdraw your hand subtly and carefully, so that it does not move;
and tie it at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the thread with pliers and tie it together, placing it between the healthy tooth, so that it does not irritate the tongue;
and then leave it so tight as it can remain, and if it loosens, the thread slips, then tighten it with another thread;
and it will remain and serve in this manner for its entire duration, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two defective ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, replace it in its place, fresh for fresh, as we have said;
and let no one else intervene who is not wise and skilled, and sometimes a tooth shape is made from the bone of a fish, and it is placed in the place where the defect is, and it is tightened as we have said, and it remains and serves for such a long time.
There is sometimes this condition which comes from below the tongue or naturally, one is born thus; or by an accidental wound that has closed;
and the procedure is such that you work on the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your lap, and lift the tongue;
then cut the nervous ligament widely, until the tongue is free from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knot, which is due to the closing of a wound, insert the hook and cut that ligament;
and be careful that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which lies below;
and when you have done this, lift the area with rose water and plantain, or with cold water, then place a pad of linen under the tongue;
and let the patient scratch the area each night so that it does not seal over.
And if bleeding occurs, place powdered vitriol on the area; and if the skin becomes moist, cauterize it with a lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat it further until it is healed,
and if you see it colored black or hard and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a carbuncle;
If it is inclined towards inflammation and there is moisture, then pour in the compound, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and release it from both sides. And if your strength fails during your work, then apply powdered vitriol until it is dissolved, then return to your work until you have exhausted all energy;
Then lift the place with care and caution, and treat it with other treatments until it is healthy.
abscesses of the throat Sometimes in the throat there are lumps called "godath," and they are properly referred to as the two tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, be careful:
If this abscess is hard with little sensation and of dark color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for fear of bleeding; but let it be until it becomes black, and then you will open it, as it would burst on its own;
and if it is of white color and the root is fine, then prepare the instrument to cut, but first look to see if the abscess lies still and is calm.
Then have the patient sit facing the sun, and place your hands under his feet, and work on his mouth and hold the servant's hands between yours, and press the tongue down with all the instrument, as follows this form;
and whether of silver or tin just like some knives:
When you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the lancet and insert it into the kernel, and draw it out forcefully above as much as you can;
and draw some thing from the cloths with it, then clean it with the instrument, which is shaped like a forceps; and all the heads are curved, and one side to the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or tin;
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, cut it with pliers, of which here is the form: And let it be cutting on one side, and on the other side named;
And when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, rinse the patient's mouth with hot water, and with warm and soothing water, and if bleeding occurs, rinse the patient's mouth with water, or use boiled pomegranate rinds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then treat him until he is well;
and sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them as you would the two almonds equally.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that had arisen in her throat, namely the abscess of the small sense;
And I had nearly completely closed the throat so that the woman could not exhale because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she would have died if she remained thus for one day or two.
And the abscess had risen so high that it had forced two inches through each of the two openings of the anus.
I then hurried and inserted one lancet, then drew it out, and drew out a great portion of phlegm;
then I repeated the procedure on the other nostril, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue;
after inserting the lancet into the abscesses, I removed some of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passage in her throat was cleared, and she now began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to incise the abscess for a long time;
and the abscess regrew quickly, filling the place that I had emptied, until it became very large;
then I guided it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained without growing;
and I left those areas, and do not know what God did with it after me.
of the eye
When phlegm descends to the uvula, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";
and when it is thick and round, it is called "uvula".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does no good, and you see that the gross abscesses are abated, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it open;
and that which is round and assembled and is not long; and it is bloody or of dark red color or black, then it is necessary that you avoid making an incision in it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, regarding its blueness and length, you should seat the patient before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we made mention previously; Then insert the lancet into the eye, and draw it out from below, and cut with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for cutting the two almonds.
And you must not cut beyond the excess that is beyond the natural boundary;
for if you cut more, it will harm the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said about cutting the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient fears the cutting, it is necessary that you use cunning in the cautery to calm his fearful senses.
And the method of the cautery is sharp heat. And have the patient place their head on your lap, then press the tongue with the instrument that we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and rinse it thoroughly with vinegar water, so that it is not too thick or clear; And in using the construction of this instrument, about which here is the form:
And at the top it has a container where one puts the medicine, like the bowl of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine over the eye;
and the patient should lie on their side so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine, so it does not go down to the throat, and bind it;
then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it against the eye for half an hour, until you see it has congealed and the twitching caused by the medicine subsides;
and if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument along with all the cotton on the wound, until the cotton adheres to the skin above the wound;
and do this frequently until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and after four days or five.
And if you need to restart the cauterization with the medication, then do so, and after the cauterization wipe around the wound with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what is around from the medication;
and let it be soaked in cold water, and let it be treated with gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is more effective than incision, or the cautery;
if it is treated by fumigation according to this method, take calamint and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and put them all or some of them in a pot, add oil, and boil;
and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot have an instrument shaped as follows: And it should be made of silver or copper, and place one end in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube until the condition is cured;
After you start again often, until the swelling subsides, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the hot onset of the abscess, for many things happen. and do not do this while the heat of the abscess is declining.
And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and place a piece of eggshell inside the head so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to oppress the mouth, and this is a good remedy together with safety.
Many times it happens that bone or a fish spine, or some other thing, becomes stuck in the throat;
It is therefore necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instruments so that you may see the movement of the thing;
and what you cannot see and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance, the foreign object will be expelled through vomiting;
when the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of silk, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then guide it through the throat; and when it comes to the place, it will harden, and then draw out the fire;
and if it does not come from the place we mentioned, then take the instrument of flint according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised up; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or suffocation may occur, nor should you push the bone in;
and it is best for the patient to insert the instrument, so that he may be moved where the obstruction is located; If the boil bursts, draw it out fully so that all the instrument is equally inside, until it is completely open.
of the blood from the throat
Sometimes the blood is treated, as I said in the division, by the care of medicines; and when that does not help, then look in the throat of the patient by the light of the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument I told you about.
And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook, or with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
And if that is not effective, take a hooked cane and insert it into the patient's throat, then place a hot iron on the hook of the cane, and do this frequently. And if the patient is stained with water all day.
Then take a full glass of cold water, work it in the mouth, and pour it down to swallow, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it falls.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye;
do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
And the method of the fumigation is that you take a pot with live coals inside, and cover it with a perforated lid, and in that hole place the stem of the instrument;
then pour in your fumigation, and have the patient place the end of the tube in their mouth, and close the mouth so that no smoke escapes, but reaches only to the blood;
and the blood will now flow out, and if it does not fall, then restart the fumigation multiple times;
and allow the patient to suffer thirst, and let them eat dirty and salty things, and do not let them drink water;
and then it will be necessary for her to discharge fire through this regimen.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the blood, that is, when it can be seen, resembles curved tongs for inserting into the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and there are teeth like a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot let go;
There are many types of abscesses, according to what the memory brings forth one after another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size;
and it is in two ways, one of which is in its own likeness, and from those that it holds moisture.
And the second way is for the places where they are on the body.
for abscesses of the head are different from those of the buttocks, and abscesses of the flesh area are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And there are abscesses that one must not pierce until the swelling is dead according to its completion;
and there are such as must be pierced when they are hard, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints.
For when abscesses come near joints, and one lets it remain until it is rotten around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, thus causing contraction in that limb.
When the abscess is near a principal limb, and if you delay piercing it until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb;
when it is near the fundament, pierce it accordingly so that it may die.
and it is not right to pierce an abscess before the formation of pus is complete, except for one near the fundament, so that it does not fester and spread inside, leading to a fistula. and cannot be healed in a short time.
And you must know the time for piercing an abscess that is dead according to its completion, which is when the pain has subsided, and the fever has abated, and there is a decrease in pain and redness, and the swelling of the head of the abscess subsides, and other signs.
And you must make an incision at the lowest point of the abscess, where it is most apparent.
And let the incision be along the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, at joints and nerves and arteries, in all places equally where there is no tenderness. In cases of bleeding, according to that limb.
And when an abscess is in the flesh, it is better to wait until it is confirmed to be in complete resolution before proceeding with puncture, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before these points, the venom of the abscess will spread through the body, and it will be full of much pus. And by chance the lips and depth of it become hardened.
And if there is an abscess that needs to be punctured according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
And you must treat small abscesses with small incisions. and in large abscesses, large openings, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to lay the cautery on them and cover; when they have become like the tips of leaves, and are softened, then it is necessary to do as one does with blisters:
and if there are some that are split into three corners, and there are others that one covers as with the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the armpits;
and if there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Those who have an abscess without a head, such as a superficial subcutaneous abscess, you must pierce it completely;
and when the abscess is large and there is much pus collected, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that hour, but draw out only a part; then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more afterwards; do this gradually over many times, until all the pus has been expelled;
especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old men who are infirm. For the pus sometimes suddenly stops coming out with the pus, which by chance can kill the patient, and you would not be blamed for it.
Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have punctured the abscess, wash the wound, and examine whether the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a full-sized wound, then apply bandages made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess with many openings, then you must insert a bandage into each one so that they come together;
and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin and have sewn around it, then you must fill it with old cotton or linen lint that is dry, and bind it until the third day;
Then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, administer cold and soothing remedies, and wet a cloth, placing it on the bleeding area multiple times.
And if the flow of blood persists, administer management and treatment, and use the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter time, and the place where the abscess is very dry, then you must put up tents and cloths moistened with wine and warm oil;
and if it is in summer, and the place is fleshed out, then you must apply cloths moistened with water and oil, or with wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said;
and then open the abscess and wipe it clean and treat it as is appropriate until it is healed.
And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses:
And I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
For small abscesses in the head come in various forms, like the feathers of a goose, and there are many similarities.
There are some that are fatty and of such a nature that they contain moisture as well as pus;
and there are some that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt about them unless an artery opposes.
And the work on the waist is such that you should try all the instruments called "entromissoire," of which the forms are shown hereafter, what they contain.
For if there is moisture, then he splits it from above along the length.
And when the moisture is drained, carefully scrape away without leaving anything of the skin that contained the moisture, for it returns quickly if anything is left behind;
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and in salt, and in poultice the wound, and leave until the next day; and those who remain from the night shall run these tasks.
And then restart the cotton, as before, on the second day, and on the third, until you know well that none remain from the night;
then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds one month, cut it according to this form, lengthwise; and place your ointments there, and scrape it from all sides, and apply all your care to draining the pus where it lies;
And if the artery opposes this, do as I told you afterward.
And do the same for an abscess if it is stony, and in cutting and curing as I have told you.
And when you cut into a stony abscess and moisten it, it becomes easier, for they contain little blood. And if there is an abscess on someone's head where there is no moisture, and it was from such abscesses that I treated one on the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone that could not be broken; and if one had touched it, it would have caused the same injury as a stone.
In other abscesses that occur on the head, such as those that come at the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the incision should always be made in the lowest place possible, so that pus can exit easily;
and treat them as is appropriate.
This type of abscess often occurs in the neck, and sometimes below the armpits, and also in angles, and at times they appear elsewhere on the body, and are very numerous, growing one with another.
And each scrofula is properly within its own area, such as the boil and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities among these scrofulas.
and there are many similarities among these scrofulas. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malignant and do not wish to obey [the treatment].
in the one that you see has good disposition when touched, and it resembles the color of the skin, and is not hard near the neck veins or arteries or conduits, and is not deep;
you should cut it open from above, and scrape each part, and spread the two edges of the wound with scissors, if you need to, as we have said for head abscesses;
And move it bit by bit, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let the spatula not be sharp nor cutting, so as not to harm the hand, and do not go too far forward, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work on it, then put into the wound vitriol ground up, or some powders that constrict blood flow, and press on the wound; and leave it until the abscess is reduced, and the wound becomes soft and begins to pus.
And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your work until you complete it;
Then ask your proper instrument if there remain any small scrofulous swellings, and cut them out and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, you must not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it off with strong double thread, and let it fall away without harm;
Then pack the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
And if you cut out the entire boil, then you must bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, since there is no excess tissue due to the size of the boil. Then you must focus on cutting the root of it, extracting the pus, and sewing as we have said.
Then you must focus on cutting the root of it, extracting the pus, and sewing as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold excess, pierce them where it is most apparent;
and pierce them as was said before, then administer strips with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; And when the wound is well cleansed, apply an ointment for healing flesh until it is healed.
The ancients spoke and wrote about the treatment of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who practiced it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have a squint, it is necessary that the split in the throat which is called "epiglottis" be excised; and one should not assist with this, because all the veins and the flesh of the patient are affected in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both tonsils.
When the illness is in the phlegm channel, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger of choking.
It is therefore necessary, when we wish to divide the epiglottis, that we make a small transverse cut between three or four circles, or rather between two circles, according to the size of the cut on the surface, not in the cartilage;
and those places are suitable for the division of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long on both sides.
And if the master is fearful, he should stretch the skin of the throat for one inch, then cut through until he reaches the cartilage; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the surface as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the division of the blood vessel in the neck which jumps out at the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open for a piece.
And when the hour has passed from which strangulation is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew it all along away from the cartilage;
then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and death approaches. Then cut off the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four; then they commanded to sew up the wound and clean it, until it was cleaned.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe.
and I was called to treat her, and found her as if dead.
I examined the wound and found the blood that had come out, and realized that she had not cut any vein or vital artery but rather the wind was escaping through the wound.
I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated it until she was healed;
And it happened to the lady that she became red-faced, and afterwards returned to her disposition;
For this reason I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
This abscess is called a "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess in the shape of a bean, and it occurs mostly in women;
and it occurs in two manners: naturally, and as accidents;
in the natural case, there is no swelling.
And the accidental case occurs in two manners, one of which is similar to fat for us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from us due to an artery; And there is fear in it, and one must not operate with fierce force except on the one that is small, and prove and search throughout the entire incision: if you find it as thick as fatty tissue, and it cannot be in any vein, cut it like one cuts knots, and draw out all its coat if there is any. and search thoroughly right away, and treat it as is appropriate, until it is completely healed.
There are many kinds of knots, of which I will describe all the similarities;
and now it is necessary for me to explain all the differences that exist between knots and issues.
I say that sweat and fever come then, until the boiling is past, and the pus is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With the poultice there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains flour, which is its own substance and matches the color of the skin, and it begins like a patch, and becomes large;
and they are of two types, either greasy or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the knot, that you test and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what their form will come in the chapter which is after.
And the method of examining abscesses is that you take the moistest part that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers back and forth, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, as befits the size of the abscess;
Then extract the interosseous element, and take care not to damage it.
If moisture flows out when cutting, regardless of its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after extracting the interosseous element no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then cut it in a cross shape, and take it with forceps, and lightly scrape from each side and be careful to treat the coat where it lies so you can pull it out healthy with the knot;
and if you cannot pull it out whole, then remove it piece by piece so nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the pain will return many times;
and if it remains a little while, and the blood does not flow, then apply the wound with some corrosive powder, and hold the wound steady, and place hot poultices for abscesses, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed;
and if the wound is large, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and treat it with what promotes flesh growth.
and if the wound resists or another issue arises, then hurry and apply a place treated with powdered vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound begins to pus, and then treat it with blood boiling. then return to copper the remaining part of the wound.
See here the forms of the instruments used for insertion, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small;
and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, for encircling the abscesses of fistulas;
and they are also like the needles used to sew sorcerers' tools, and are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are said to be more effective for encircling fistula bends;
and there are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the holes.
The forms of tumors are of many appearances, as you see here:
and there are tumors that have two curves in three manners as well;
and there are tumors that have three curves, and they are also of three manners;
and there are tumors that have two curves, and tumors with only one curve, and they are also of three manners;
And all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these for which one performs the operation is sharp, and there are some that cut only from one side, so as not to scrape the flesh, for this reason one does not cut the vein or the nerve.
and of these interosseous ones, the alemeles are placed in sleeves so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of abscesses;
and there are three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and one uses them only in fleshy parts such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places;
And sometimes one makes another instrument small, resembling the rind of figs, in this form, with which one stops blood: and it is placed sometimes at the place where the veins are cut, and at the arteries, and sometimes follow this large form:
Sometimes the testicles of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts;
and remain deformed and swollen, and if one wishes to treat them, it is necessary to incise according to this form from line b to g: then scrape off the fat, and apply medicine that heals flesh to the wound, then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the testicle descends and is enlarged due to its size as happens with women, then cut it into two parts above, through two similar incisions; so that one is held to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line 2 until the line g; then peel the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to excessive bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in a caustic ointment; and leave it until it has absorbed the remaining fluid and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come under the buttocks are like hard scrofulous lumps containing sides, and there are some that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to the line .g.: And when all the pus in the abscess is emptied out, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat it with ointment as needed until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles a scrofula, then cut it as we have said for incisions of scrofulas, and if the wound discharges pus, then treat it with cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is sealed, abscesses often occur; and similarly, when the vein swells and becomes an abscess,
and when it is recognized as such for the artery, the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you sense the tightness;
and when it is for the vein, it appears swollen and protruding;
and it is foolish to incise this abscess, especially when it is near the armpits and angles of the neck and on the collarbone in many other places, and it is very large. One must therefore avoid the treatment with iron, and for one who is at the head it should also be avoided, and in one who is swollen from an artery cut above the skin;
then treat the area with bandages, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues, until it is exposed;
then insert a needle into it from the opposite side, and pierce it to the other side, and tie the artery with a doubled thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then puncture the area between the two ligatures with an instrument so that the blood flows out which is inside, and release the abscess;
Then administer the treatment that induces urine flow, until the patient urinates; Then treat them with appropriate ointment until they are healed;
and if the abscess is near the vein, then you should paint with your hand as much of the abscess area as possible, then pierce the needle beneath where your hand is, and make a puncture, and there should be double thread so that you can draw it out from the other side; then ligature the abscess, as I told you, with one part of the thread around each of the two threads;
and if you fear that the thread might break, then pierce another needle along the entire length of the first incision beneath the abscess, and tie the threads in four places;
Then cut the abscess until the excess matter flows out, then cut the excess of the heart and leave those that are bound;
Then apply a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat with bandages and ointments until he is healed.
Just as abscesses can occur in the artery and vein, abscesses also affect the nerves when they are injured, or from excessive labor, and similar circumstances.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows and in all places where there are joints, and these are severe abscesses, and their color resembles the color of the skin, and they cause great pain in many conditions.
and when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the flesh but near the heart;
and it moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor up nor down, and those that are in joints should not be cut with a knife: by chance there might be contraction; and for those who have it on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel.
and for those who have it on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel. If the abscess is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, suspend it with an incision, then peel it, remove it, and sew up the wound, healing it until it is healed.
At times, this occurs in the abdomen and not elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its likeness, and its root is subtle, and the growth is large;
and there are both small and very large ones;
and I saw a man who had two of them in his abdomen which resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, and they had fine roots, and moisture corroded them quickly.
I removed them and found one to weigh eighteen ounces and the other six, and in the procedure during the incision you must observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the muscle is white and moist with a fine root; cut it wide with a scalpel, and have the fire cautery ready at hand.
cut it wide with a scalpel, and have the fire cautery ready at hand. For when cutting, there are often excessive blood flows, and if the blood overwhelms you, then quickly apply a cautery.
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made linen thread and tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then tighten it, and do not stop tightening the linen thread until it cuts through the artery, and each time with careful work;
and if the roots are thick, be cautious when cutting to avoid harming the belly, but you can safely cut half of it, then apply a cautery so that it does not regrow;
Then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon which is of dark color and poor feeling and milk-white in appearance.
For this is an embedded abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers shortly thereafter.
when the swelling subsides If the appearance of the swelling comes from a cautery wound or a tear on the surface, and it is on the abdomen and some of the bowels are exposed, as happens in other ruptures, or due to blood that seeps from veins or arteries according to what is before mentioned, or due to gas;
and if it is due to the rupture of the surface and the exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the skin, and it is a minor matter without pain, and evident from various exits. And if this is due to the opening of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when it is pressed at its sides it swells up, and then subsides, and perhaps it is hard, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and for heavy work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor matter, and clearly visible when you press it with your hand, without any constraint;
And if it is due to blood, then by these signs, large and hard abscesses are recognized, and they form according to a certain quantity; And if it is due to windiness, then it is shallow upon touching, and the treatment is to observe whether the appearance is due to arterial blood, or from a vein, or windiness.
And if it is due to windiness, then it is shallow upon touching, and the treatment is to observe whether the appearance is due to arterial blood, or from a vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear about it, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bile, then you must instruct the patient to hold their breath, and lie completely straight, then bleed around the navel. Then instruct him to lie still between your hands, then go around the place you marked for the entire span of his wrist, then extend half of the abscess above to the full length of his thumb; Then bind the area tightly with a strong thread or a rope of thick silk, and let the bandage be firmly applied.
Then work on half of the abscess extended over the bandage, and place your index finger inside, seeking the intestine. if you find it caught in the bandage, then untie it and push the intestine out of the belly.
and if you find the bowel, grasp it with your hook and cut off the excess.
and if the artery or vein opposes you, proceed gently around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads outside of what you have done in a cross shape to pierce.
Then incise the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the wound until it becomes pus-filled, and the dead tissue will slough off on its own. When you incise it when it is subtle and pus-filled, then treat it as needed, and drain the abscess as we have said.
When you incise it when it is subtle and pus-filled, then treat it as needed, and drain the abscess as we have said. And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and close the wound.
of the ulcer We have discussed in the section the similarities of gangrene, and how it should be treated with medicine, and how one should avoid treating it with iron.
And we say the ulcer spreads in the flesh, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancients said that when ulcers are in places where they can be scraped out as ulcers which are in the breasts, and on the thigh, and in similar places, and it should all be removed when it is at the beginning;
nor has anyone ever been healed before me.
And the treatment, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you should occasionally purging the patient of black bile;
Then make it bleed if there is obvious congestion, then position the patient properly for the procedure;
Then pour your ounces into the ulcer, and clean it from all parts, and remove everything without leaving anything behind;
and let the blood flow freely until it stops, and press firmly on the area with your hand or something else, and if the continued bleeding prevents you from cutting into an artery or vein, then apply a cautery until the bleeding is stopped; then continue to treat it until it is healed.
of hydropsy We have already discussed in the division the similarities of edema, and how the accumulation of fluid is formed, and the signs of each type, and the treatment that is done with medicine, and that which is treated with iron:
and one should not treat with iron in these two cases: that is to say, tympanitis and hypochondriac pain, for it is a fatal thing;
then when you treat this condition of hydrops which is called "ecclites" with medicines and the cure does not help, look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides hydrops, such as coughing and intestinal discharge and similar things; do not treat with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient is of strong constitution, and he has no other illness but hydrops only, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should act thus: Lay the patient straight upon your hands, and the assistant presses the abdomen while inserting water into the lowest part of the bladder, then take the splatinum spiral in this form: And let there be cuts from two sides. point it, and ensure that it does not enter so deeply as to reach the intestine when inserted, nor can it be bent;
then observe if the dropsy is located towards the intestines: if it is necessary, you should cut three fingers above the navel directly towards the groin; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be three fingers to the left of the navel;
and if it is for the middle, let it be to the right, and it must not be that the patient lies on the fissure so that the excesses do not run to that weak place;
then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and lift it up, and raise your hand to all the subcutaneous tissue between the skin and the muscle as when flaying, to the quantity of a fingernail or slightly around;
then pierce the muscle until the subcutaneous tissue reaches the empty place, and that is where the fluid is, then draw it out forcefully, and insert this instrument which has the following form: And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and it is made of light brass or reed, and at the end has a small hole. and when it is on one side, three perforations; and two from the other side, and one from another;
and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers make on a quill:
at the top is the blade, so that when the instrument reaches the tip, it now descends along the instrument;
empty then half or one-third of it, for if you empty more than is necessary at that time, by chance the patient may die from the shock of the weapon's effect on their spirit, or they fall weak, or approach death;
but according to the emptiness according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what the disposition of the strength of the patient signifies, and his pulses;
then draw the instrument and retain the fluid, and it is now retained for the heart that stops up the passage above the liver, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
then restart the instrument on the other day if you see that the patient is suffering from this, and draw off a small amount of fluid;
do this on certain days, and be careful not to overdo it so that there remains only a little bit of fluid.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much fluid, then treat with the grave or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and let them drink. and treat with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of fluid, as I said before.
Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
It is necessary to pierce it immediately throughout the spatumile very finely according to this form:
then place a fine cloth plug in the opening, and tie it securely for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, let him urinate, and then replace it.
and perhaps it is not necessary, for the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.
He whose orifice is small should be treated with a cloth plug of flax, as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Those who do not have the passage in its place are afflicted, for some are born with the passage at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they raise their penis upwards; and they cannot urinate because the matter cannot reach the bladder, and this is a serious illness.
And the method of the procedure is that the patient lies supine on his back, then stretches the head of the penis and cuts it as thick as a quill, so that the passage sits squarely in the middle, as it should;
and be careful of blood loss which often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding as one would for stopping blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
pustules of the penis Often this ailment comes to the shaft, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh;
and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones;
it is necessary that you remove them with a fine needle, and clean and treat all of them, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with Diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and spreading, then you must apply a cautery to it.
When you have cleaned it, and if the ailment is in the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the part that is inside first; and when it is sealed, then treat it to open.
For when you treat it together, the head of the penis is not assured that it will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come to the penis and the testicles;
it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of pomegranate peel and vinegar, then treat it with other treatments until it is healthy.
And if bleeding occurs, then treat with the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cauterization helps with both conditions at once: that is to say, in the flow of blood, and in corruption;
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, it is necessary to insert a tube of lead into its channel, and the patient urinates through it;
And when the skin is irritated at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, whether it be due to a wound or an abscess, then you must burn it with a sharp instrument until the ligaments are loosened, and completely free the head of the penis from all sides;
And if it is difficult to describe this condition, then you must burn it with the spatula slightly at the head of the penis and around the skin;
Then gently separate them, and place a fine damp strip of linen soaked in cold water between them, so that it does not irritate again.
Circumcision is not a disconnection of continuity as other wounds are. Nevertheless, when we perform this work of our own will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for their well-being.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they did not practice it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the majority of masters and seniors who performed circumcision around the time of St. Paul, and in many places, with a single incision;
It is risky because there are two layers, and by chance one might cut through the upper layer while leaving the lower intact. Now there is the need to cut again, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleansing which follows St. Paul's method, the tip of the member is not securely protected;
And in the cleaning of the nail, by chance the iron slips, and they run the work, and many times they are born such that they do not need cleaning and I have seen it.
Of the cleaning that is done with force to the entire length of the filament, I have found the goodness through experiment, for the force cuts precisely both above and below.
For when you press your hand, cut evenly in one single motion; but the thread should be tight against the skin;
and the method of the first procedure is such that you make the child understand, if he understands, that you are not going to tie the thread around the penis solely for tying, but rather you can do it in all ways that you can;
then hold it straight between your hands, and apply the force between your hands or behind your feet where the child cannot see, nor any of the instruments;
Then place your hand on the shaft and blow at the joint, and pull it up until the head of the shaft is in place; Then clean it well of the debris that has accumulated there, then tie the area with a doubled thread, then secure it from the pit to another knot;
Then clean it well of the debris that has accumulated there, then tie the area with a doubled thread, then secure it from the pit to another knot; and hold it with two hands at the second knot and at the thumb index, and cut between the two knots, then lift the joint quickly and pull the head of the shaft; then allow the blood to drip slowly drop by drop, for this is what happens in such cases; and apply powder and on top of the powder place a small cloth moistened with the yolk of a cooked egg mixed with rose water, seasoned with good and fresh oil, and leave it there until the next day, and treat it further as needed until it is healed.
The form of the forces for the purification is thus:
the two shoulders should be sharp and cutting, and the shoulders as large as the blade evenly:
the mistake in the purification is when the pus inside goes to the incision;
then it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, as if the flesh were forming an abscess;
and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it to your fingernail, then hold it with pliers, and then cut it.
And if they exceed three days, and that which is below the groin is swollen, let it be until the abscess is sufficiently reduced, and then gently scrape it;
Move the area as much as you can, and avoid the part of the shaft, so it will not harm him.
Treat the area of sharp wounds with powder, as we have described in the chapter on powders, and if you move the heart too much, and it goes beyond what is necessary, it will do no harm;
treat it as we have said until it is healed.
from the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the presence of stones, or clotted blood, or tumors, or dead tissue, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone that is stuck in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and place the feet on the back, extend his abdomen above the part of the back, and restrain the patient's flanks as much as possible; and then press the bladder to expel the stone upwards, thus freeing the urine;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," of which here is the form:
and let it be made of thin silver, like the feather of a bird; and let the tube be one and a half palms long, and thin at the tip.
And the method of urination output is that you take a doubled thread, tie one end to the head of a piece of wool or cotton, and put the other end of the thread inside the syringe;
and cut the excess wool and push it up to the head of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and vinegar;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then press the penis upwards towards the body;
then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and feel when the patient senses that it has reached the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless what guides its path is twisted;
Then stretch out the thread over all the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it forcefully, and let the urine flow.
and continue using the syringe until the bladder is empty, and ensure the patient is comfortable.
When blood or pus comes to the bladder and putrefaction gathers there, and you wish to introduce liquids and medicines, use all the instruments that are called "clepsydre," and this is their form:
It is closed, and has three openings: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see;
and the leather strap through which the medication cord passes should be such that it stops up the tube well without addition, so that one can draw out moisture and insert when necessary;
and when you want to administer your medications into the bladder, place the head of the catheter in the moisture, and pull out with the syringe that is inside;
So you will draw the moisture to the chest area, and then firmly set it by pulling it in; The moisture will enter inside and reach the bladder now, so that the patient can feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder:
It is of silver or rush, and the head is higher;
and direct it to the side where the ligament falls;
then take a bladder of sheep and put the moisture you wish to use for enema inside it, then tie it between the two breasts tightly with a good strong thread, and heat the container of this moisture over the fire;
Then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then press your hand above the bladder gradually to bring all the moisture up, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
and if you do not have access to the bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle out of it, and pierce it roundly around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then attach the circle as one would a sieve, and place inside it what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and secure it to the instrument;
and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of the stone
We have already discussed in the section the ways of stones and their extraction along with medicines;
and I have explained the difference between stones formed in the kidneys, and all the signs, and which stones one should treat with cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder similar to how it does in its subtlety;
and there is an obvious urge, and the patient itches his penis, and does so many times, and then becomes stiff; and in many cases the foundations;
and the healing of children is easy until they are four years old, and it is very difficult in the elderly, and for young adults it is moderate, for those who are between youth and old age;
and the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders in finding the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and lift him up and move him backward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes from a higher place;
then make him sit between your hands which are prepared behind his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downward;
then feel and touch inside;
if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall out on touching with the entire finger, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a woman, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult male; and insert it into its base, and feel for the stone, and when you sense it with your finger, gently push it towards the bladder neck;
then press with your finger, and push it out where you intend to make the incision.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend his right hand towards the genitals upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is underneath the genitals in the part where one makes the cut;
then place the scalpel, which is its form: And make an incision between the genitals and the anus, not in the middle but towards the left side of the navel;
and let it be straight over the stone, and your two hands should immediately be at the anus, and the cut should traverse so that it is wide at the beginning, and inside narrow, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
by chance the pressure is so strong at its base that it springs forth without effort;
and you should know there are such stones with corners and edges: it is difficult to remove;
and there are some that are smooth, like a rosehip, and round, from which the removal is easy.
For those that have corners and edges, make the incision larger;
and if it does not spring forth, then you must clamp it with forceps that are like a file at the tip, to firmly grip the stone so it does not slip; When you place behind the eye a subtle curved instrument;
and if you cannot do it thus, then enlarge the socket and if blood leaks out, then constrict with vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, then place the larger one into the bladder neck first, then cut above it, and extract it forcefully, and the smaller ones afterward if there are any.
And if it is very large, then you must observe it carefully and make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out immediately so that the wound cannot close;
but still strive to extract it, or disintegrate with pliers, until you remove it in pieces;
and when you have completed your work, then apply the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, and compress it, and place over it a moist cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then lift the patient onto their neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you dislocate it, wash the area very well with oil and water, then treat it with diafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses and corrosion come to the wound, and clots of blood in the bladder, and because of this the urine is retained, which is recognized in such a manner that without straining with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause harm.
Then lift the wound of water and urine and pus, and help it in all ways that you know, until it is healed;
And it is necessary that every time you treat it, you bind the two thighs together, and apply the medicines to the site.
And if the stone is small and it is in the channel of the penis, stuck inside, and the urine cannot exit; then treat it as I say thus, that you cut it many times, and the cutting is forgiven by this treatment. I have already tested this in this way.
Take an iron fork according to this form and let it have three prongs fixed in one handle:
Then take some thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
Then gently insert the probe into the shaft until it reaches the stone; and turn the probe in your hand within the stone bit by bit until you can pierce the stone from another direction;
the urine will come soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the shaft. If it is broken immediately, and the stone passes with the urine, then the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then cut the shaft directly over the stone between the two ties, then extract the stone, undo the ties, and clean the clotted blood from the wound; and treat until he is well.
of women's stones
It rarely happens that a stone is formed in women, and when it does occur, the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
one reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second reason is that one cannot find a woman who is willing to reveal herself to doctors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is skilled in this medical practice;
and the fourth reason is that the stone in a woman is harder in composition than the stone in a man, so it requires deeper incisions, and there is great risk. And if necessity demands this, then you must seek out an experienced midwife, and finding one is difficult, and if you cannot find one, do not desire even a chaste doctor.
and present a wise woman in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command that she do what you command regarding the inquiry into the stone; and carefully observe whether the woman is a virgin:
and carefully observe whether the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the fundament and search for the stone;
and if she finds it, she should press it down with her finger, and advise her to insert her finger into the patient's vagina, and search and firmly press her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, she should gently move it from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh;
Then cut around the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the groin, where it moves, and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move his hand above the stone or below it, and let the waist be slightly bent at first;
and do not move his hand above the stone or below it, and let the waist be slightly bent at first; then insert the probe into the waist, if you feel the stone then enlarge the incision so that the stone can come out easily, and know that there are many types of stones:
that is to say, small and large stones, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with edges.
know the signs to understand the outcome.
And if the flesh prevents you, then place ground vitriol at the site, and hold it there for an hour until the flesh is softened;
Then return to your work until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about for extracting stones from men to help in your work.
And if the blood flows from there, and it is from the artery that has been cut, apply the powder to the area and bind with cloths and linen strips, and do not attempt this again, and leave the stone unextracted, for the patient might die. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work, until the stone is expelled.
Aquous humor is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white substance, which comes from the testicles, contained within the egg.
and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly on the membrane of the eye, so one thinks that it is another eye; and this is the skin of the cornea between the white syfac that we have mentioned;
and this happens only if there is pus present. And the generation of this aqueous retention is due to weakness that affects the bladder, and this material spreads out.
And sometimes it comes from striking the eyes, and this moisture can have many colors: where it is a color declining to yellow, or without redness, or black, or clear white, and this happens more frequently;
and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white membrane that we have mentioned, then there are small abscesses, with pus long as the figure of an eye, and does not affect the eyes themselves, because there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper tissue, the abscesses are accompanied by part of an egg, and because of this, it is thought to be another kind of egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white membrane, one can feel it well;
then when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test it throughout the entire area, as its form has been described above. According to what follows the introduction, judge what is within.
And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be bled according to his strength and the condition of his body;
then place him on his back on something slightly raised, and put many cloths under him;
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs below the heart.
Then take the scalpel and cut through the skin from the middle to where it is long, right up to the base of the thigh, and make your incision perfectly straight while carefully cutting the skin until you reach the white fat layer.
Then pierce the white fat layer full of fluid with a wide incision, and drain all the fluid out, and then apply your forceps, and stretch the white fat layer upwards.
and do not touch the heart of the groin, but only the white fat layer. Cut through entirely or piece by piece carefully, so that if you do not cut it thoroughly wisely, the fluid will return.
and if the eye jumps during your work, then reset it in its place once you have completed the work of the operation.
Then sew the two halves of the buttocks together with one seam, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the eye corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspensory, fearing the loss of blood.
Then cut the area around the eye along the suspensory part, and remove the eye, and treat it as we have said.
And if heat is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe the blood, and place in the wound linen soaked in rose oil;
if you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe the blood, and place in the wound linen soaked in rose oil; and place another piece of linen soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two sides, and cover with doubled cloths, and tie it up according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and wrap them with linen strips according to this appearance and join them by stitches at the waist of the trousers, one extending from the buttocks to the back, and the other to the side part;
and the other two heads on the two sides, and let the entire ligature be secured in the ring of the bandage;
and sometimes this part is treated with a cautery instead of an iron cut, and you should take a fine knife-shaped cautery, cut the skin on both sides, and heat it as we have said, so that the white surface containing the fluid is exposed;
take the cautery in this shape, and pierce that surface with tongs, and scrape it with this fine hot cautery:
And cut in all the ways you can, until you scrape it clean;
and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg;
and know that this work is more safe; and move while preventing blood loss, and proceed with the work of surgery;
and if anything opposes you, whether an abscess, blood loss, or something else, then treat what opposes you according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this work because of its horror, then perform perforation as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have said that watery pus is there, make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess on the underside across the entire span of the body, and place the incision along the length of the body;
and let the openings be wide so all the fluid runs out;
then place cotton on the area, secure it, and leave it so that the remaining fluid can drain, then treat it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not allow the fluid to drain from the wound opening, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used for treating the fluids of hydropics, as described above;
and enlarge the pit of the wound, and check that the fluid returns, and it will heal after six months or thereabouts, and when it is healed as before, then the patient will live out their days.
Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many conditions, so it seems to me that one should leave it as it is;
and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses occur in the body, especially in the groin; and this is due to many causes.
This is known to be due to sharp and bitter excess, which spreads to the groin, or from impact;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin; and finds no pain, and there is a severe abscess;
and sometimes a severe abscess is fearful and stony, and of dusky color, and at times it comes from the blockage of an artery or swelling of a vein.
When it is due to the blockage of an artery, it is known by the hot condition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it is not appropriate for you to touch it.
One who is affected by the swelling of a vein is known by its condition and the expression upon feeling it with fingers, and one can properly treat this condition as well as others. And it is that you cut the cord of the testicles, then place the egg above, and draw out from the white membrane, and release the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already hardened with these new membranes, then you must draw out the egg and cut it.
And if it is air in the membrane, or within what is inside the vessels, then you must release all of that space, and cut it completely.
And if the birth of the flesh is at the back, then it must be cut entirely, and remove the eye, as we have said.
And when your work is complete, apply the wound with moist wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a covering similar to leather, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient moves very painfully when he walks;
And the treatment for this illness is also very dangerous as the previous one, and nevertheless we will tell you about it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on a raised chair, then attach the suspensory from below to both hands, to all the vessels that are near the penis, and hold them tightly, and stretch them firmly;
then cut through the flat spatula with a wide and sharp blade across the vessels until they are exposed, and then peel them back on each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then insert a needle with doubled thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein is, and tie it again to the other end; Then cut them straight down the middle, along the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture;
Then treat the wound as you would others where boules [blood clots or swellings] are raised, so that no vessel bleeds which nourishes one of the sides;
for by this no harm comes, and if it happens to all the vessels, then it is necessary to draw out the sides from all the vessels; so that the eye does not lose its nourishment due to the cutting of the vessels, and dries up and cannot be helped.
The occurrence of this condition is due to the section that comes from the syphac [a surgical procedure], or the extension on the abdomen in the part of the flanks, because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the sides;
and this rupture is either on the surface or from the extension of it, and these two manners come from many causes:
or from impact, or from jumping, or from lifting heavy loads, and from similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of the surface are that they occur gradually over time, and do not happen suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the depth, because the surface presses on the intestine.
And the signs when it is a section of the cheekbone are that they cause sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, near the skin, because of the exit of the intestines and the body's reaction to the absence of the cheekbone.
And sometimes the intestines descend with the hernia, and are retained inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are constricted.
And in these iron treatments there is fear, because of which it is necessary to avoid them.
And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to probe the intestine with his hand inside the wound, if it can be reached; Then bind him around his neck with your hands, and lift his thighs;
Then stretch the heart above, and cut all the skin of the genitals long; Then insert hooks into the sides of the waist according to what you need to open the wound, and make them such that the eyes can come out;
Then peel off the skin that is below the genital skin until the white tough skin is uncovered from all sides;
Then insert your middle finger into the area below the genitals, between the white skin that is beneath the genital skin and the second layer of skin, and separate what is behind the penis, and between the second layer of skin;
and then move to the right hand inside the groin area, and stretch the white skin upwards with your left hand, and lift the egg across the entire surface towards the waist; and instruct the attendant to raise the egg upwards, and undo those who are tied behind the binding;
and ask your two assistants if there is any intestine wrapped around the white skin, and if you find anything, push it back into the abdomen;
then take a needle with a thick thread made of several strands, and insert it into the rear part of the skin, which is behind the groin skin; after the waist, then cut the threads that appear as strands until there are four strands; Then they arrange them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the surface, which we have mentioned is beneath the skin of the genitals, with a strong ligature from two sides; Then wrap the head with thread and bind it firmly from two sides so that none of the substances nourishing them can enter inside, preventing an abscess from forming; and place the ligature again according to the first ligature for two digits long, and after these two ligatures leave the surface that is beneath the skin of the genitals exposed for one digit; and then wrap the rest according to the circumference that the egg carries;
Then cut in the part which is away from the skin of the thighs, until the blood flows, and the bowel, as we have said before;
Then apply moistened wool in oil to the wounds, and wrap it as we have said. And sometimes the white membrane we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood leakage. For this often happens, and leave the bandage on until it falls off on its own;
and if it delays in falling off, soak it in warm water and put on what we have said until it falls off;
then treat the wound with another method until it is completely healed.
of flesh hernia
In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a vine shoot attached to the skin, in such a way that you bind the vessels above the waist lightly towards the back;
Then cut it open, and treat the abscess of the one who is working, until the pus flows;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and it is apparent;
and no part of the intestines descends into the scrotum, and if it does descend, it is serious, and repair must be done at all hours;
and if it remains too long in this state, the wound or sphincter will worsen, until the intestines descend;
and this happens due to the extension of the sphincter in the groin, as we have said, because it is stretched, then becomes lax and swollen and apparent;
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before;
and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and the patient lies supine on their back between your hands, then raise the area of the fracture swollen in width according to a measure of three fingers;
and then extract the sinew which is beneath the skin as follows, then take the thread and place it on the apparent part of the sinew;
and press it firmly to the abdomen, then stitch the two apparent parts of the sinew above the head of the thread, and stitch one and the other;
Then extract the head of the shaft, and do not cut into the surface or extend the egg or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the root of the intestines; Then treat it with the treatment for wounds.
Then treat it with the treatment for wounds. And when you cut the threads, then anesthetize and treat the wound until it is healed.
The swelling is constrained, and there is no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is soft in this place, and closer to healing.
of the softening of the skin of the genitals
Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men, because the tissues inside are softened, and it appears milky.
and it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, that the patient lie down on his back, and cut the soft skin over the natural skin;
then sew the two lips together at one seam, and if you wish, suture the excess soft skin at three seams or four firmly;
Then cut between the stitches, and treat it as other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
of the discipline
Know that castration is condemned in our law, and for that reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book;
and it is necessary only for two reasons:
one of which is that the priest knows how to respond when asked, and knows the treatment;
and the other, because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
I say then that castration is performed in two ways: By attraction, or by incision.
In the one we do by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until the joint is softened and hanging. then take them in your hand until they are reset and you no longer feel any discomfort.
On castrating the calf: you should restrain the animal, and press the skin around the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut around each one in one stroke after you have sufficiently flayed them;
and leave some of the fatty tissue and the fine tissue that is on the vessels;
and this method of castration is more brutal than that which is done by attraction, because with the attraction some part of the testicles may remain, causing the animal to desire lust;
then treat the wound until it is healed.
Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways among men: one in which between the two testicles there is an opening as in the form of a woman's anatomy, where there may be hair, and sometimes it encircles the passage for urine.
And the other method is for women, and place on the navel as with a rod and two eggs.
And the treatment for both the male and female is that you should cut away all adjacent tissues, and treat them as other wounds;
In the second manner, for those whose urine sprays along the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
Tentigene is a condition attached to the natural part, so much so that it is too ugly to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
It is necessary that you paint the excess of the tentigene on your hand with scissors, and then cover it lightly;
and do not go too deep, so that no blood comes out, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed;
and for another condition that appears at the entrance of the mouth and spreads, and sometimes becomes severe, it resembles a cow's condition, and therefore the ancients called it "cow sickness. It is necessary that you treat it as we have said about tension, and care for it until it is healed.
Erratic is it when the nature of a woman's body is not understood, or the opening is small; and it is natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has come;
and it is natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has come; or it is due to added flesh, or a thick or thin layer of fat, and it is formed properly in the belly, or on the sides, or inside, or wherever;
and it prevents conception and childbirth, and possibly the onset of menstruation;
and knowledge of these conditions is gained through examination of the body.
If constipation is close at hand, either use two fingers or the right [finger].
If it is due to thin fat, and it is close to the second books, hurry, and treat thus:
Place your two thumbs together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread.
then press the two thighs firmly together until the fine substance [of semen] is gone, and it should be above the obstruction;
then take wool, and mix it with oil, and place it on the area, and have the woman lie face down each day so that she cannot sit.
And if the wound is hard and thick, then you should cut it with a scalpel resembling a myrtle leaf.
If the obstruction is of flesh, then suspend it to the thumb and cut it off;
and have the blood-stanching medicines ready, such as vinegar, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with plenty of egg;
Then apply a bandage of cloth wide enough so that the wound cannot close.
and keep it on for an extended period, and apply a dry linen bandage.
then continue treating with other treatments until he is healed.
And when flesh becomes diseased in a wound, it should be cut according to this method, except for embedded abscesses. For in the embedded abscess that is in the wound, one should not cut it open.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without proper treatment become hard and painful.
and I have already mentioned in the section the similarities of these conditions, and the signs, and here I will say those that respond to treatment.
I say that when hemorrhoids and hard lumps are firmly fixed in the wound and do not yield to touch, they cannot be cured by cautery.
Those who have the mouth of the ulcer, which can be felt, are those who can be treated by curettage.
Then you must place the woman in a cold room, then extract the tumor with pliers, and cut it at its roots, then apply powder made from medications that constrict blood, such as oak bark and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
Then place his feet against the wall for an hour, then put them in cold water;
and if bleeding occurs, have him sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and gall and similar things, and then take oatmeal, mix it with honey and oil, and make a poultice for his back.
And if the bleeding stops, that is good. If not, apply cupping to the back and breasts without injuring them;
Then take wool, moisten it with plantain juice or sorrel juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the area.
And when the abscess has subsided, treat the area with ointment until it is healed;
And that which is called "albathir" is red, and it resembles a rough head, so it must be cut as I have said about the thul. And then treat it until it is healed.
Many types of abscesses occur in the flesh, such as canker sores and stone abscesses and herpes and ulcerations and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, I must speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes in the armpit, which is not one of those that occur in the bowel.
And if you wish to know the work of iron, then observe whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and turns red if you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it come to maturity until the pain subsides;
And then have the patient sit on one chair, and let him lean against two small chairs where he can rest his back, and support his feet at the parts below the knee;
And let his thighs be spread out, and have him place his arms under his knees, and bind them securely with a good cloth;
Then succeed in bringing the instrument to his right side for working on the mouth of the dislocation, as will be described further;
And it is necessary that when you bring this instrument, you first insert a probe to determine the depth of the dislocation so that what enters into the instrument does not go too deep and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depths of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not irritate it;
and he should place the tip of the instrument above, and hold it in position.
And when the abscess is ready to be opened, and it is gently incised by hand, then it should be cut at the top, near the suture line;
and when the cavity is emptied, it is necessary to place moistened cloths in rose oil, or in dry green oil;
and place the cloth directly over the wound at its deepest part, and put clean, moistened wool on top of the wound and around the finger in water or decoction of mallows;
Then treat after two days of ointment application as needed, until it is healed.
and sometimes one lifts the swelling and cleans the wound with a mixture of water and honey, and then with water or boiled roots of lilies and artemisia. Then return to applying ointment.
And if the wound is laid on the poultice, then you must avoid heating with iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
of childbirth It is necessary first for the midwife to know the signs of natural childbirth, and these signs are present when you see the woman pressing downward and desiring to smell the air:
then the fetus hastens to come out; then you know that this birth is according to the natural pattern, and the passage is under its head, and the afterbirth with it;
And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his abdomen so that the child comes out quickly;
for when it descends over its head, the afterbirth comes out with it, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses through proper postpartum care;
and those who come in another manner do not come naturally.
For sometimes it comes out feet first, and can exit from the thighs or hands, or emerge above its belly, or even twist around its neck, and in other deformed ways;
it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, to avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the forms in which one should assist them.
If the child comes out naturally on its head, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool, or have women hold her;
and prepare her nature with oil or fenugreek boiled, and then pour the mixture between her two small stibium containers whose form is described here: and split the second fingernail, and cut it at its base so that the moisture inside can come out;
and press the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then she must be given an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil;
then make her drink and sneeze from conditi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: Now remove the hair.
And if both hands come out of joint, you must reset them gently bit by bit; and if they cannot be reset, place the patient on a chair and raise their feet up; then lift the chair off the ground, and support the patient so she does not fall when standing;
and if the hand cannot be reset and the child dies, cut the hands with a knife that is placed here beforehand, and extract the child, and reset gently.
of the issue of the child upon its feet When the child comes to its feet, it is necessary to lift it up; and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
then take one of the feet and extend it little by little.
When it jumps up to the thighs, then instruct them to grasp it, and make it sneeze from this position. and may it jump out, if God wills.
And if it does not go further as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to its natural form. For then it will move easily.
And if it does not come out as we wish, take mastic of the terebinth tree, and sesame oil, and boiled gum, and grind all in a mortar; and place the mixture according to the woman's condition and apply this ointment, then have her sit in warm water up to below her ribs;
and when it is softened, apply the collar of myrrh to it and place it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on the chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her stomach, for the baby jumps now.
of the delivery of the child onto her knees When the child comes in this condition, place the mother's hands on it little by little; then let her be seated on her neck, and hang her feet down, and lie her on the bed; and fold her hands little by little, and then press her hands on the stomach, and remove the cushions underneath until she is prepared to go down; and if the child does not jump, then take his feet and move them apart, then pull up his belly with your hands; and lift the child little by little; and instruct the woman to hold on as tightly as she can when the child exits.
of the birth of the child who comes with one hand hanging down It is necessary for the surgeon to return the hand: if it cannot be returned, then help the woman stand and walk;
if she cannot walk, then have her lie on the bed and spread her legs apart;
then apply the ointment that I have described;
And if she does not give birth, seat her on a chair, then proceed to reset the hand. And place the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to hold on until the infant comes out.
of the birth of the child upon his neck, and with his hands spread out, and his face turned towards his mother's back It is necessary for the patient to hold their hand, then turn it little by little, and move it gently;
And when it is even, place the natural medicinal herbs and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little;
And when you have done this, seat her on the chair, and instruct her to hold on; And cause it to sneeze. In the same manner for the entire second part
In the same manner for the entire second part When the swelling comes to this state in the second area, cut into it with your nail until the moisture is emptied;
and if the swelling rises on its face and neck, cut it from the base so that it is not restrained, and move the swelling;
then insert the child as needed until it is in the proper position, and instruct the woman to hold onto something for support;
Of the issue of the thighs Know that gout comes many times, and sometimes three or four come at once; and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens. These are strange things, and they do not live, though sometimes they occur;
These are strange things, and they do not live, though sometimes they occur; I know that they are multiplied and are separated by the surface that divides them, which is attached to the root;
and sometimes they emerge as naturally as any others, as we have said.
And if they emerge severely, treat them as we have said, and let the hand be skillful, and do quickly and gently what it does; and do so as it is worth for healing. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or even up to XV, and are completely shaped like a child according to the measurement of the wise physician, and it is necessary that he carefully examines all this, for perhaps something similar may happen to them; do as is appropriate according to these instructions.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman of a dead child in her womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; you must determine if the woman is in good health and has no condition that causes fear of death;
The woman should be laid on her back, and her shoulders inclined downwards, and her legs raised;
and the attendant should hold her from two sides, so that she is supported on the bed in such a way that she does not slide down with the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth with warm oil mixed with a paste of hellebore and fenugreek seeds, and smear her hands with these oils and pastes;
then gently press them into the warm oil, then place your hands in positions suitable for this, and watch to see if the child is ready to descend head first;
Place the cautery on his eyes or neck or in his mouth or palate or behind the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs, and if the descent is at the feet, place it on the toes and middle sides.
He should hold the cautery in his right hand, place it between his two fingers of the left hand, and press lightly with his whole hand, placing the cautery in any of the places we have mentioned until it reaches an empty spot.
Then place the other cautery opposite it, or the third one if needed, so that the extractions are equal.
and then stretch it evenly by moving from side to side, so that the bones can exit, and let the muscles be in such a way as to hold the bones, as shown here is the form:
And if one part remains stuck, anoint the joint with some of his oil and push it into that part, and pull on the other part;
and if any part remains stuck, place this muscle higher up and do so until it all comes out.
And if one hand comes in front of the other and he cannot bring it back for grasping, you must wrap around with a cloth until it fully emerges; Then place it at the joint of the sole or at the heel, and thus you must do with the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the head of the infant is large and it is tight in the birth canal, or there is an acute assembly on the head, then you must insert a sharp spatula between your two fingers, cut the scalp and extract the fluid; where you round it with the instrument called "almidach," from which the shape comes with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one;
and do the same if the infant has a large head naturally;
and then pull the bones with pliers, and if the head jumps out and it is stuck at the forceps, cut them until the moisture that is in the foot exit is reached;
and if it cannot come out, cut it piece by piece until you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture runs out.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the adjustment to the mouth of the socket is light.
And if it is tight in the belly or chest, you must stretch it with an instrument wrapped around your hand; and cut into the belly or chest until the moisture that is inside runs out;
and if the other limb is removed and the head remains, push your hand in firmly through the wound, and pull it out to the mouth of the wound; Then insert either one or two, and pull them out forcefully;
and if the mouth of the sore is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come there, one should not work on it, but instead administer moist and greasy things; and the physician applies plasters, and uses aqueous solutions that soften and moisten.
And if the child is on its side, and you can make it lie flat, then treat it as we have said for a living child;
and if one has no power to do so, then pull it out forcefully in pieces, and leave nothing of the placenta behind.
And when you have done this, apply the remedies we mentioned for large abscesses that come in the marsh;
and if bleeding occurs, apply cold compresses, and use other remedies as needed.
And I saw a woman in whom the fetus in her womb had died, then another was conceived upon it, and that one also died. After a long time, she developed an abscess in her throat, and it swelled so much that it burst, and began to severely decay.
I was called to treat it, and I pondered for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I applied a plaster with strong adhesive properties, and out of it came a bone, and after several days another one. I marveled greatly, for there are no bones in the abdomen.
I thought that they were the bones of a deceased child.
I treated the wound, and laid bare the bones, until the woman was in a better state; and treated the woman for a long time in this manner, and she would occasionally discharge some pus from the area;
and I have recorded this chapter for the reason that when masters encounter something unusual, they should know how to offer assistance.
Here follows the form of the pressure treatment, which can be found in books;
and to two turns at the two shoulders of the two limbs. Nevertheless, let the horns be finer than the rest of the instrument, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the shaft be two fingers wide, and the margin of the wood one finger, and in length half a palm; and between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of the same shaft, which are fixed in one and the other, half a palm long or a bit more;
and these two adjustments are positioned at the mouth of the instrument to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the appearance of the tongs; and have two heads with two joints, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers wide;
and when you wish to open the vagina with the instrument, have the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging down and her legs spread, then insert the two joints of the instrument together into the vagina, and hold the head of the instrument under between her thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument, as you did with the tongs equally, according to the amount you wish to open the entrance of the vagina, until it is as wide as she desires.
These instruments are all elevated, and their kinds are multiplied; and when the doctor has them prepared, the work is done more quickly, and they are more effective for people in terms of their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument because you have not prepared it, for their needs are not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with something appropriate, and press your hands over her mouth and nose; and if she expels it because of this, so much the better.
If not, take a poultice and make a hole in the cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cascara, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are to be boiled in water over the fire;
then place one end of a tube in the opening of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the jar, and let it draw until the vapor comes inside the jar;
then make her sneeze, as we have said. The second joint moves quickly.
And if she remains after this treatment and does not improve, instruct the patient to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in hellebore juice, and then apply it to the affected area, and seek a second opinion; and when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the pus does not drip during extraction;
but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then straighten; it will come and disengage.
And if the mouth of the nostril is narrow, we have described the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs;
and if it does not respond to everything we have said, be careful not to force it;
but it is necessary that the part of the nostril be tied to the woman's thigh, then administer an enema of four-part ointment; it will come out and return, and it will succeed;
however, when it comes to this, if a bad smell reaches the stomach and head, and it distresses the patient. Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be used for them:
some of the ancients have tried fumigation with cabbage and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain her flowers and menstrual cycle is as follows:
And it appears similar to a cane, and one places the head subtly in the nature, and the joints wide over the fire;
and let the fumigation be above the charcoal, and continue it until it is spent, and then start another one.
Many children are born who do not have a discernible anus, instead it is closed by subtle membranes: Then it is necessary for the surgeon to incise that abscess at its proper place, and not do so with a sharp spatula, and be careful that it does not touch;
then apply wet linen soaked in wine and oil, then treat with an ointment until he is healed.
And if you doubt that it will stay in place, insert a lead tube into the hole, and leave it there for several days, and remove it when the patient wishes to go to bed.
And sometimes this obstruction comes from the sudden closure of a wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cut that closure: and treat it as we have said about the tendon of the finger.
Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular, and those that come near the anus to protrude, or in the space between the two parts, may be one fistula or several;
And when that knotting is old, it works, and still moisture keeps white or subtle bowel, and sometimes these fistulas are perforating;
And they are known by what comes out in vomiting or flatulence when the patient vomits, and sometimes a worm is expelled.
And there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and reach to the joint of the thigh, and to the root of the knee.
And thus one knows the perforating fistula at the fundament, and not perforating: And place your index finger at the base, and insert a fine needle of steel or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity, insert a fine tent of linen or horsehair until you feel the tent or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no passage of pus or air or blood, as we have said: you know that it does not perforate; then hurry to treat it.
And when the fistula reaches to the bladder or to the passage of urine, then he urinates through it, and cannot be treated with medicines.
If it perforates up to the knee joint, then the tent reaches that place; if there is no twisting or the pain around it does not indicate injury, then it will quickly become a cramp, and neither medicine nor immediate treatment by poultice is effective;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure other than diligent work, and the vanity of foolish physicians who intervene;
In the case that is not persistent and is not old, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is when the patient lies on their back with their spine between your hands;
and the patient lifts their legs up to their thighs, and keeps their thighs inclined towards their abdomen; then insert a tent of linen, or of flax if there is twisting, until you know where the tent reaches;
If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you must insert your finger there; if you then feel that the tent has been pierced,
and if you feel the space between your finger and the skin is exposed, then you know it is perforated; do not proceed as it cannot be healed.
It is said that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely;
and the treatment involves heating the cautery gently according to the width of the fistula, as was mentioned before; and inserting it fully heated into the fistula until it reaches near the fundament; and do this two or three times until you know that the burnt flesh is charred, which resembles a feather of a bird;
and then treat it with moist cloths dipped in butter until the flesh grows back, then treat it with an ointment that promotes healing and binds.
If he is thus well, it is good.
If this cannot be done otherwise, it cannot be healed;
and if the tent (probe) enters but does not reach the deepest part that is at the foundation, and there is a thick layer of flesh or fat between your probe and the abscess, and you see the fistula under this covering of the heart; cut it from the beginning of the fistula and then insert the probe again, and apply the cautery afterward until you reach the end of the probe; and the bladder will be relieved, and it will fall;
then cleanse those damaged tissues that appear like a bird's feather, and leave nothing behind.
And if the blood fails you, and it cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or with astringent medication.
For the fire cauterization brings together two good things: that is to say, the removal of excessive tissue, and stopping the blood and drying the moisture;
then treat moist bladders with butter or ground substances until the area sweats, and remove the burned tissue from the wound.
then treat the wound with hot applications and hardening dressings, and the medications should be dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes up to the base of the tailbone and is distant from the body, place your finger inside it and examine it.
If you feel the tent, and it is between II tissues or flesh where it is close to piercing, there should be no hesitation but proceed with faith and hope, by means of one of the III methods:
where you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it down to the base, or if you can place tents and treat it as described first;
and do not proceed too deeply, so as not to cut the tissue that holds the base, and ensure that evacuation occurs willingly; then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will heal, or you remove that covering and clean it after cutting near the base, whether by tent or other appropriate instrument; Then cleanse the damaged flesh that is in the wound as much as you can. Then proceed to restore the wound and to prevent a fistula from forming outside the rectum:
Then proceed to restore the wound and to prevent a fistula from forming outside the rectum: it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas occur in this manner: and it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side near the rectum under the skin, then take a probe with a point shaped like this: And insert the thread in a curve from I to II, and insert the probe along the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the end.
If it is perforated on the margin of the rectum inside, then extract the thread from that passage, so you insert your finger into the rectum;
and pull the head of the thread, and bring the two shoulders together, and hold them to each other, and leave it for one day or two;
and restrain it several times until the thread cuts through the tissues between them, and they fall;
then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
If the fistula does not open, pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep. For it is not appropriate to make an incision too deep for the displacement, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spinous process where one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side not so, for that one does not cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
Emorrhoids occur in two manners: where they are within the fundament, like grains of sand, and there are small and large ones, and in the skin there is blood, and there may be one or more, and they are near the fundament and at the head of the fundament;
but those that are near have little moisture, and often there is a bit of clear water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the flesh;
and the treatment for those who have them within the fundament is that you instruct the patient to abstain from going out of doors until the fundament feels better and the children are aware; hurry and grasp it with tweezers, where you hold it with your nail, then cut it at its root;
and if the hooks cannot hold them due to moisture, they take them with a sponge, or cotton, or a piece of cloth; and extract them with your hands, then cut them, and apply some hot powder used for cauterization on top; and you cauterize them as is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other methods until they are healed;
and if the stool cannot be expelled, give the patient a harsh and abrasive enema to cleanse what is in the rectum so that it can pass freely; when the patient is constipated, and if the stool is hard in the rectum, then the treatment is light;
when the patient is constipated, and if the stool is hard in the rectum, then the treatment is light; And it is that you grasp them with your nail or with pincers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and that he fears the incision by iron. It is necessary that you manage the suturing according to this manner:
It is necessary that you manage the suturing according to this manner: take the thread and tie it to a needle, then pull the thread from above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be loose;
and tightly pull the thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do this for all of them, and leave one to allow the excess blood to flow out;
Then place a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or wax over the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave them until they dry, and when they are dry, treat them with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
from the dryness of the feces or foundation Often there is dryness of feces in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is of no use. It is necessary that you cut with the tip of a scalpel or your nail through the skin above it, without allowing it to become moist. then treat it until it is healed as necessary;
and if it does not heal, then restart the shaving more vigorously than before until it heals greatly, and even if it becomes irritated; then treat him until he is well.
with trembling The formice is a small striped appearance on the body, and it moves very quickly;
and sometimes it is found in the cold, and one feels it like being chilled to death, and it spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose feather or a strong eagle feather, and place the quill on the chill, until the red circle surrounds the chill all around; then move your hand around the quill until you cover all around the chill, and place it quickly, and uproot the chill from its roots.
And if you wish, do this with a thread of linen or iron according to this form, and let it be fine underneath and drawn over: do not pierce, to keep the hair, and press the hairs.
And if you wish, cauterize the tremor as it is described before in the chapter on cauterization.
Sometimes a cleansing enema is made of silver or sorrel, or molten silk or barley;
and sometimes these instruments are made small and large, according to the needs of those to whom they are administered. Those who treat children and those who are weak and in pain use small instruments.
Those who treat children and those who are weak and in pain use small instruments. The form of the small and large purge is as follows, and the belly is bound in this manner:
and there should be a space where the abdomen is bound as you see, and the intestines inside are pierced;
and there should be two holes on one side and one on the other;
And let the container in which medicines are placed be made from a beastâ€™s bladder or parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes, and have one digit of space between each hole, then insert into these holes strong rawhide threads twisted ten times around, and assemble the container as if it were a drum. And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then administer it as an enema;
and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the tip of the enema with oil or beaten egg white, or something similar, then insert it gently; Then the minister presses the patient with both hands together until it is fully inserted, then removes the enema, and lifts the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine wishes to come out, let it stay as long as possible; and if he sleeps one full night, then the help is greater.
And if you administer an enema for a disease of intestinal discharge, and the medicine quickly exits, then repeat it until he is well.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscessed, then the enema should be as fine as for a child;
and this is the form of the fine enema in which the leather is tied:
We have already said in the section about the treatment of wounds;
We will tell you about the remedies of hands and medicine, according to the fulfillment.
I say that wounds vary according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are from falling stones, and the cutting of swords and knives, or spears or staffs or arrows, or similar things;
or they are made according to the places on the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the feet, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the remedy for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from falling stones or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you fear the rise of a hot abscess: If you treat it immediately to staunch the bleeding from the head itself if little blood comes from the wound, and let the bandage be on the opposite side of the injured part;
and prevent the patient from overindulging in wine and heavy meats.
And if he does not want to be bled, then let his meat intake be reduced, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat.
and place on the wound, if small abscesses occur, cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in styptic wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, then apply to the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood and has not been exposed to air, a powder which I will describe shortly;
And if the wound has been moved, apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar ones, and the lips cannot be brought together by tents, then sew them together, as I will describe for belly wounds and sutures.
If the wound is exposed bone and pus, and barely holds together in one spot, cut it; then treat the wound with medication, and replace hard tissue in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as brains and boiled wheat, as well as pulses, and similar things.
And if you find on the skin putrefaction that does not adhere to the bone, cut away all the putrid flesh, and apply forceful treatment, then treat it;
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be cauterized, and it cannot be staunched with medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, secure it with a thread; And if this does no good, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: and it is that you put in this powder which the patient should sprinkle as the fire has moved.
And the manner of the powder is as follows: take one part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; living charcoal three parts, and powder it finely, then apply to the wound and press firmly until it sticks well and adheres to all its blood;
and then stir the poultice well, and leave it on without removing it, unless it swells; for one should not remove the medicine until she is healed.
And sometimes one uses charcoal alone when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but the burn has moved the wound.
And if the burn has moved the wound, especially in winter, one must not use this powder on it;
but apply some digestible ointments, or a poultice made of oat flour with water and honey, until it discharges pus; then treat it further until he is healed.
And if the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;
And I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, then there is no other treatment but to leave it untreated, and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerve and causes it to retract; and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
but let the medicine be warm, such as chalts washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and copper leaves also washed in sweet water, and other mineral stones in this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then sew and ligature with bandages, then treat it until he is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and she is swollen and full of pus, then pierce it at a lower place;
and if the artery is cut and blood begins to flow out, then stop it, tie it off, and cauterize it if necessary;
and if the spine of the neck is cut by the sword, and the conduit through which flesh passes is guarded, then sew up the wound on top of the windpipe, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural position; and then bind it carefully, and leave it for several days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then probe it; and if there are fragments of bone, remove them all as far as you can; and those that you cannot reach, leave until the wound heals and then separate and align the opening.
and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and there is an abscess, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if air bubbles come out of the wound when the patient inhales: you then know that the wound is fatal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it for the blood that does not stop flowing, and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but apply an attracting ointment and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have an ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; then no spasm will come, nor will there be any harmful trembling or alienation of the heart; And when you see good signs, then know that the wound is safe. Then cure her with poultices and other treatments until she is well;
and if she cannot recover, and you treat her, then know that there is an abscess;
treat her as one should. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or worse on the back, then treat it as one would in front; if it is large, with sutures;
and if it is small, with powder; and if it is pressed against the bone, and in pieces, then seek the wound, and treat the torn tendons if they are separated; and if they are not separated, let the wound heal, which will ease the extraction;
and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
of the rupture of the abdomen
The rupture of the abdomen is great, medium, and small;
in the large wound, sometimes the intestines protrude, or the nerves of the intestines, which requires their replacement;
and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because if the intestines are not replaced gradually, they can be pushed back in too quickly;
because the intestines swell immediately when they feel the cold, so they are pushed back in more forcefully, and because of this, a smaller wound is worse, since replacing the intestine to its place happens differently than with others.
And know that a rupture of the abdomen occurs according to four manners:
the two common sutures occur in the seam of the abdomen, and the suture of other wounds of the body and two other specific sutures are common to other wounds;
and they are still more specific to the seam of the abdomen, and I will describe each one and clarify.
I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestine protrudes, and it is a difficult thing to replace, this is done by one of the two methods: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a manner: moisten a sponge or a piece of cloth in warm water only, or boil it in hot water with thuja, cypress, and spikenard, and rinse the intestine until the swelling subsides;
and sometimes use restraining wine, which is muddy and has sediment to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling begin to subside, moisten the intestine with water or broth made from hellebore and mallows that have been cooked, for this gradually opens the passage.
and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to avoid cutting, as one should not cut there unless there is great necessity.
and this is the instrument for cutting:
cut inside along the curve and not away from it, and see here the form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, put them back in their natural place if you have the power, for this is better.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, you should have the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, raise the head and feet higher than the affected parts, and similarly, if the rupture of the abdomen is on one of the two sides, place the injured side higher than the other;
And thus you must administer what I say regarding large and medium wounds.
In small wounds, apply what is appropriate for them, then hold the dressing in your hands which covers the entire wound opening, and bring together the edges.
and this is the common method of suturing, which involves taking one or more needles according to the width of the wound, then leaving some space at the top of the wound and inserting a needle where there is strong thread. and pierce both sides of the skin with two needles, which are inside the skin from below, until you puncture it on that part, and bring together the two ends of the thread all together;
Then take a thread doubled around the needle on both sides, then bring together the two edges of the wound, and leave one space, and insert another needle;
Then tie the thread around the needle as you did with the first needle, and continue doing so as needed for the number of needles required until the entire wound is closed.
and the needles should be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, because fine needles cut through the flesh entirely, and overly thick ones cannot enter properly: that is why they should be medium-sized;
and it is not appropriate to insert the needles too far from the flesh and skin, as they may cut and damage the wound before it heals;
and then cut the tips of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and put tents or cloths over the needle tips to keep them from moving, and leave them until the wound is sealed;
and this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it only requires one or two needles.
The second method of suturing is common, and it involves bringing together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the underlying tissue with one needle or thread that is strong.
and when you have pierced all four edges together, pull the needle back to the part where you started, in the manner of sewing cloth;
and place a space between each seam the thickness of a small bean;
This seam is known to the surgeon, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his abdomen, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and intestines came out about two palms long, and the wound was within the abdomen.
I returned the intestine to him after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound was sealed up until fifteen days, and I treated him, and he was well.
And the physicians had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I would place old cotton on the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle, and bring it from the outer part to the inner part;
when it has pierced the skin straight through, lay the tip of the thread or suture where you inserted the needle, and have it pierce from the inner part to the outer part;
and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as tailors do with skins, and leave one end on one side, and take it up on the other, until the entire suture is complete.
The second method of suturing, which Galenus described properly, is like this: some people bring together the two parts naturally, and join one end of the suture to the other in such a manner:
Insert a needle into the head of the thumb nearby, and pierce only that place, and leave the two heads of the shoulder alone; then turn the needle and pierce from the outer part to the inner part, through the two heads of the shoulder;
then pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inner part, in two other heads of the thumb that are on the opposite side;
and this is the most proper method of suturing and the most common.
Galien says this and some testify that one should suture the abdomen with two needles, each having its own thread;
And one must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts;
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suturing is more difficult than for other places on the abdomen.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
And it is when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the arrow had drawn it, then reset the intestines and sew it up;
Then apply powder that heals flesh, and if the arrow has drawn it, then apply any salve that is present until the wound absorbs it; And cut the thread, and let the stitches be sealed, and the wound; then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;
and if you do not have medicine, place on it as soon as it begins to discharge, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you do not need other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you fear that the wound may spread to the principal limbs, then it is necessary to moisten fine wool in warm infused oil or rose oil, and place it around the edges, and between the shoulders;
And if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and this often happens, then administer an enema of boiled black wine to him, and especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestine;
And pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is due to the smallness of its veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the spleen jumps out of the wound, put it back in as with the intestine, while it is fresh.
And if it is old and has turned green or black, then you must tie off the area that is black so no more blood comes out, as there are veins and arteries there;
Then cut away what is between the ligament, and hang the two heads from below the wound up to where the fibres fall off to ease the extraction when the splinters drop out, and the wound will heal.
of the fracture of the eye socket
When the intestines are pierced and the wound is small, it can sometimes be repaired in certain individuals, as I witnessed a man who was pierced in the abdomen with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and developed into a fistula, from which feces and gas would escape;
I treated it as best I could and did not stop suturing until he was healed, and the flesh grew together.
And when I saw him soldering it, I feared the patient would have pain in his abdomen; and he did not suffer any pain, but remained in better disposition, eating and drinking;
and some experienced practitioners say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in such a manner: take large pads and then bring the edges of the wound together, and when the pad has opened the mouth, place it on the two edges so that it holds them closed;
and then cut the head of the pad, and it should be held in place so that it cannot come loose, then place another pad after in the same manner as before, until the entire wound is covered; And sew the wound.
If the head enters the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from an animal's intestine, in such a manner:
take the end of this intestinal thread that is very clean, and then tie a fine linen thread around it in a spiral, then insert the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine together, and knot it at the opening.
and this method of stitching intestines is not stronger than according to the way of trust and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is no remedy or health, except for subtlety.
of a fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it begins to discharge, is generally called a "fistula," and especially when it is deep and goes inward.
And a fistula is according to truth an irregular hard and white swelling where one does not feel pain, and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it appears clear and hollow, and at other times thick; sometimes small, and at other times fairly large;
and I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed and has no flesh, it is none other than due to one of the IX causes: that is to say, because of the smallness of the blood in the body; or due to its malice; For because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, do not allow new flesh to grow; where there is too much swelling; when the pus is foul, and the matter is of poor quality; where the treatment with medicine is not good; for because the corruption is like that of pestilence; for because the property in the region has slow digestion, and delays health, and is swollen by nature; where there are veins in the bone:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicine in the division.
Now it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is done by handwork.
Know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that occur in the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, in the face, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and some affect the principal part of the limb and similar areas.
And all fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is no remedy except surgery, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I have mentioned, and you are confident in the treatment, and you wish to know it, then take a probe of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, and insert it;
and if the fistula is curved, then search with a fine probe of lead, for lead can bend around the curvature;
and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot properly probe it with probes, then irrigate through one of the openings, for the moisture passes quickly from one opening to another, and clean it;
then probe carefully as best you can to determine if there are any bones or nerves involved, and feel thoroughly, and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where they feel it;
And when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or a vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the pus and the corrupted flesh that are inside;
And then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep in a straight line, you must cut deeply as much as possible, then place moistened tents in medicinal water, and put them up to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
And then apply healing ointments to heal the flesh until it is healed;
And if it is not healthy because of this, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it away.
If a vein or nerve does not trouble the principal limbs as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackening, then remove it until all corruption is gone, then treat with things that generate flesh until it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, and continues to swell as before, know that you have not gone far enough:
then expose and search until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the area;
And if he is thus healthy, it is well. If not, you should know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach. there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupt bone and you can pull it out with forceps, then extract it with the appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, remove them all, do not leave even one.
and if the moisture opposes you and there is no mistake or fear, then cut through the moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them at once, apply something to the wound that will promote putrefaction, and leave it until the flesh around the bones is rotten; then they will more easily have the bones removed.
And if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, remove only the corruption until all the black matter is gone, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the corrupted tissue, and it reaches to the substance of the bone; it is necessary to wait and cover it up to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you can take it as an example and aid in your work.
He was about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from something that came inside the body, so much so that the matter reached the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to let out for opening.
but the doctors, in their folly, operated so much on the abscess that they let out a great deal of matter, and it became a fistula, and many passages developed through which all flowed with pus and body moisture;
and many doctors treated him for two years, and there was no skilled hand in the art until I was called to it, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, as well as what flowed out through the passages in large quantities. And the body of the young man became red, and he had a yellowish complexion.
I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that they came together from all parts of the leg.
I hurried then, and probed into one of the holes until I discovered part of the bone, which was corrupted and perforated, and the corruption extended to the bone inside;
I treated what appeared to be the corrupted bone, and I believed there was no other corruption besides that which I removed;
and began to heal the wound with internal medicines over a long period of time, and it could not close;
and then I started again, and examined the bone as before, and found that the corruption continued in the bone, which I treated, and then removed it, and tried to close the place; but I did not do so much as copy around a palm's breadth of the bone, and I treated it with force to its full extent, then restored it with medicines; and he was quickly healed and recovered, and there was no need to repeat the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For often there was blood evacuation, but he remained entirely healthy, and in the place of the bone grew hard flesh, and he had good disposition without any harm or contrary effect whether going or coming.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take some linen, and stretch it at the top of the bone that is exposed, and instruct someone to hold it up; and place another bandage of woolen cloth thicker than the first linen, and bind it over the flesh that is around the bone, and stretch the top, so that you pull the corrupted flesh inward, and expose the flesh where you wish to treat, so that the bandage does not irritate the flesh;
and place a burning coal on a board beneath the bone to move aside the corrupted flesh;
and continue scraping as long as possible until the corruption can be seen and felt, and scrape again several more times.
And if the bone is corrupted and it is not apparent, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, then uncover all the flesh.
then place the coal beneath it, and then scrape from one part to the other the corrupted area, and let the scraper follow along with the extent of the corruption as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and scrape the bone on the other side where it contains;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut;
and if the corruption is in the joint of the hand or foot, it is very serious, but still you must inquire about that corruption, how it appears to you; and purify it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve oppose you;
and know that the incisions and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the structure of the bone and its appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; And for this reason, it is necessary to prepare for each kind of work its instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument of which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and by the testimony of the manners of diseases; so consider the instrument of which you have need according to what is required.
The head may become diseased either from within or from without;
and when you have treated that corruption with the cure of medicines, and they do no good, then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes by this from death, or by the greater malice of losing the limb;
And the signs are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and then the blackness spreads, and this corruption of the limb spreads throughout the body.
Hasten to cut it, and if this is due to the bite of venomous beasts such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar ones, if the corruption is at the top of the head, then cut it, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
And if it reaches the hand, then cut at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm;
and if it reaches the arm, then cut it with a knife;
and if it exceeds the cut, it is fatal, and no remedy outside of its quantity of virtue helps;
and do this entirely when corrosion comes to the foot: if it affects the first joint, then treat the next joint after it;
and if it affects the foot, then treat the entire foot; and if it ascends to the leg, then treat at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die;
and the method of cutting or binding the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister with one bandage downward, and another minister with another bandage upward, and you separate the flesh between the two ties by one span wide until the bone is exposed;
Then cut where the sore is, and place a piece of linen on each side, so that the cloth does not touch the healthy skin, and do not cause another injury or abscess to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs while you are working, cauterize the area quickly or apply some hemostatic powders;
then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with an appropriate bandage, and care for it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to a man in such a case:
a black sore appeared that seemed burnt by fire, and this corruption started on his heel of the foot, spreading to cover the entire foot;
and when the lord saw the corruption, he hastened to cut off the foot, and was healed;
and after a long time the corruption returned to his thumb, and he came to me, and I put on him things that were repercussive after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corruptions;
and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, as I had hope of repercussing the matter; and I also feared that if I cut his hand, he would die, because the man's vitality was weak;
and he completely despaired and returned to his land, and hastened to cut off his hand, and was healed;
and I have no use for it except for when one does something different with it, if there is need for it.
Sometimes an abscess appears in the flesh and remains so long that it causes a large accumulation of pus; and then it bursts and opens, and the pus flows out, leaving behind a cavity, just like a vessel; and the skin above it is as delicate as fine linen, and does not extend to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a condition is called "sinus," and is not called "fistula";
but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone deeply, then it is called "fistula";
And take the skin so you cut around that skin entirely, and similarly when it is thin, as a cloth; and it does not matter for its decay.
And if you trust that the skin adheres, and the decay is not perfect, and the skin is thick with flesh, treat it by enema thus:
check if the breast is swollen, and the pus that comes from it has a foul odor, then administer an Egyptian medicine enema which is made thus: take pitch, oil, and litharge, equally, and put it in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take what you need of them, and make it into water and honey, and administer it as an enema, and hold the passage; and leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this multiple times until the breast is cleansed, and the pus is removed;
and sometimes an enema of ash water is given when this medicine is not present; take ashes from vine wood, pour water over it, then strain it and use it as an enema until you know the breast is well cleansed;
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then give an enema of water and honey with a little litharge ground up; When you make the enema of honey and mixed wine, let the honey have the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine soften the flesh;
and when you have done this, and you are confident that the area is well cleansed, then use an enema to promote tissue growth, and prepare a diaphoretic poultice, which is made with rose oil in wine;
when you administer enemas and ointments, of which I have described the properties in treating ointments;
and if the opening of the area is small and the tube for the enema cannot enter, widen it with a probe slightly, and place a poultice made from Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened;
And if the wound is too wide, then sew it up leaving only enough space for a cloth dressing to enter, and if the opening that discharges pus is above, cut it lower down.
and if you cannot cut below the swelling as you wish, prepare it in such a way that the pus flows to the lowest point, for when the pus is abundant, do not allow flesh to regenerate within it, and if you cannot cut below the swelling as you wish, then prepare it in this manner: so that the pus flows gently downward, and do not leave any of the pus behind;
so that the pus flows gently downward, and do not leave any of the pus behind; and take medicinal remedies to apply over the wound, and place on it a piece of linen that covers the entire wound; then cut in the appropriate places an opening larger than the first one, then apply ointment underneath another piece of cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over the wound to alleviate the pain, and do not remove the large piece of linen until after several days once;
and that which is over the opening of the wound, remove frequently to relieve the pain, and check what comes out of the wound, whether it is poison or too much or enough, or digestible, or undigested;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in such a manner and you see the nature of what comes out through the wound opening, know that the body is healing, and approach the treatment accordingly;
And then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle symptoms appear after a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
For there are people who suffer delays in flesh remedies for their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if undigested food stays in the chest after many days, know that the chest does not clear itself;
and if the chest is slow to clear and is prolonged, add drying but moist medicines in substance and dry in virtue, such as diaphoretic ointment, for it contains much vitriol, and this is the final medicine;
take diaphoretic ointment, and make it with rose oil, and dilute it equally with old wine;
then apply the ointment and use it;
and this same thing cooks better when it thickens, when there is no definitive ointment present, take mummy wax, aloe, and incense, grind them together, and powder them over the honey while it is on the fire;
and then attach the piece of cloth to it and place it over the chest, and sometimes administer an aromatic herb called aristology longa, and roots of celestial lilies, which are similar to orache flour and centaury; and use simple or compound remedies: grind them and make powder, and mix it with the honey that I mentioned, and use it;
And if the treatment is prolonged and is not cured by this treatment, then you know that the corruption has reached deep into the bone, or affects hard members, or ligaments; if the treatment of the fistula is as we have said before.
Panarisis is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or occasionally occurs in other joints;
and when it is old and no attention is given to it, then the abscess becomes severe, and spreads and discharges pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and may eventually spread completely;
and the corrosion reaches the bone, causing severe pain, and the nail of the finger becomes swollen, and the color changes.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cut away all the excess that remains from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward. The cauterization is a great aid if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail adheres to the flesh and begins to pierce it, and bleeds, then you must place a thin strip of cloth under the nail where it penetrates the flesh, raise it up, and carefully and gently cut away that part of the flesh, and apply hot and corrosive medicines to remove everything; then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it out, and draw forth pus, for as long as corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
And if you see the toe corrupted, cut it at I of us as was said before, then treat it until it is healthy;
And if he is wounded, and punctured, and feels great pain, then you must treat him first;
Then cut the nail of the thumb diagonally from above, and be careful not to cut into the flesh below the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
And if it happens, place something on top that soothes.
The second joint that is born in the hands of some men is entirely flesh, and sometimes it has bones, and at times there is a nail; and some of them are born at the root of the joint, where the origin is in some places.
Those who are born with a toenail deformation do not move it, and those who are born at the toe joint may move it by chance;
The body of one who is fleshy is so light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Those who are born with issues at the root of the joint are difficult to treat: so handle it gently.
In the one who is born or should be at the back door, it is necessary that you cut first the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable thickness for him, then treat it until it is healed.
The swelling that comes to both together comes by birth, or by the healing of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
You must cut that union so that the parts repair according to their natural forms; then place between two cloths or damp cloths in rose oil, so that they do not rejoin; or place between two pieces of fine cloth until the wound is sealed as needed.
If swelling comes to either of his two hands with the palm, cut that swelling as it should be done.
The veins are thick, wrapped up, full of melancholic excesses, which come to many members of the body;
and it happens more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Therefore, you should administer enemas to him at times, and then treat him with the herb basil.
The iron treatment is according to two methods: one involves cutting them and drawing out the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein and draw out all of it.
The treatment is according to this method: first raise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the thick blood is thinned, then extract the leg of the patient from above the thigh to below the knee;
Then cut the vein at I the place, or at II or at III, of a broad size, then lift and draw out black blood with your hand, from one side to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient's strength can bear;
and then bandage it, and instruct him to eat foods that promote black bile;
and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, as it benefits the patient.
The treatment is according to this manner: raise the patient's leg if there is much hair, then place it in a bath, and wash the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swell the veins;
And if you do not have warm water, heat it by the fire, and then cut into the vein straight from the middle of the knee, or in the part above the ankle;
Then work the skin to the bone, and strip the vein from each side until it appears when you feel it;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it appears like a white cord;
then push the incision from behind, until it is raised from the skin, and then gently stretch it to the bone, then cut into another place three fingers above;
then strip the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it to the incision as you did before, and stretch it to another bone as you did previously;
Then cut another length, or more if you need it, then lift it, and cut at the joint of the foot, then draw it out and lift it up to the second joint;
then extract it joint by joint until it comes out completely, then cut it;
and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, pierce the thread with a strong double needle, then lift and draw it, and insert from underneath the edge, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; and be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, it cannot be drawn out or lifted, and this causes harm to the patient;
and when you have treated it all, place lamb's wool moistened in wine and rose oil over the wound site; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it quickly, but do not sever it; and treat it as we have said before.
The form of the iron used to cut the vein is curved, and it does not cut but rather divides the vein;
and it is of a broad curve, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and here is its form:
This vein is located in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil where there is no moisture;
and by chance it may arise in other places than the legs, and this happens from the putrefaction that comes beneath the skin, as it enters the body like serpents and worms, arising between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes a very large inflammation in the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to come out, as if it were the root of a plant.
When the wound is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half to two fingers' width, tie it securely, and let the cloth hang down the leg, and every time there is any looseness, wrap it tightly around the cloth and tie it.
and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remainder, but do not cut it at its base until it has fully emerged. For if you cut it, it enters the flesh and causes an abscess and corruption at that place, and a bad disease;
For which reason it must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing should remain in the body;
and sometimes this vein, when treated from five palms in length, or ten, and one hour later it reaches ten palms in length, and when you cut it, it emits a jet or hole, and pierces to the bottom so that everything comes out;
and empty the matter that is inside, and apply to the place anti-corruption medicines for a few days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
And sometimes this vein is more visible, especially when it appears in the joint of the foot, or at the foot itself, and much pus comes from it, and thus it often bleeds.
Treat it then as we have said before.
worms that are born between the skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "the buffalo disease," because it often affects buffaloes, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body moving up and down, and one feels it well as it passes from limb to limb, until it destroys the skin where it goes, and bleeds.
and is caused by the putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms and serpents and larvae and ascarids in the belly;
And one fears its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance it enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
When you see it necessary to treat and drain it, one cannot do so except when it is moving:
then it is necessary that you bind the area above and below with a strong bandage tightly, then cut into it and drain it forcefully, and if the pus is deep in the flesh and you cannot find it, cauterize it with fire until it stops.
and the greatest harm that it causes is that it can corrupt the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the head close to the eye, then firmly grasp the eyebrow, then cut above it, and pull out the foreign object;
and the patient should use cleansing of the body with soluble medicines for removing harmful humors that cause putrefaction, and avoid eating foods that promote decay.
of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain limbs and can move from one limb to another;
and I have seen what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she revealed her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and then, the flesh rises like a worm on the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place and fixes itself in the shoulder, and then a little while after it runs throughout the entire body until it reaches the other arm;
then he told me that it quickly circled around the body, as I saw with my own eyes.
I marveled greatly at how it moved from limb to limb, because I had never seen this disease behave in such a manner. Nevertheless, I had heard many times that pain could be moved from one place to another, but I had not seen it myself until now, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, which is why this windiness appeared constrained;
And they do not perceive according to this reasoning for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins relaxed.
And when you wish to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, raise it up and down quickly, and then press upon it until that wind tightens at its place; and cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it as one who expels wind, such as with foul-smelling pills, and snake skin pills, and similar others.
Arrows vary according to their forms and the parts of the body where they pierce.
The diversity among them is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and bristly, and adhered. and of those which have two angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are pieces;
and when it falls on any limb, it falls in two ways: when it falls on a principal limb, such as the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar parts. When it falls then in any part of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you next, become apparent: it is necessary that you avoid extracting this arrow, for death follows in many cases; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not firmly embedded, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, and strikes the membrane that is above the brain, is when scotoma and headache and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting occur; and by chance blood comes out without membrane through the nostrils, or through the ears; and by chance loses speech and voice; and from the wound comes out white moisture resembling pus, and it flows like smoke from flesh;
And if this symptom appears, then hold off on treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not inside.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were fixed in a hard object, not empty; and by chance the arrow moves like the pulse, and it draws black blood, and coldness comes with cold sweat, and syncope occurs: you then know without doubt that death is near.
And the sign of the arrow that pierces the throat is that white foam spouts from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow falls in the covering of the buttocks, it is near the small ribs; and throw great pain and groan; and move all the limbs from the shoulders.
And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, by chance something of undigested meat may spout from the wound.
And if the arrow strikes in the belly, and feces come out through the intestines, there is no hope for recovery, nor for extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine stops and will not flow, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other limb, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and upper arm and spine of the back and forearm and thigh and legs, and limbs similar to these, are safe according to many positions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, for that reason do as follows.
It happened to a man that an arrow fell into his helmet at the root of his neck: I attempted it, and extracted it from the other side behind the ear, and he was healthy without further issue.
And I extracted an arrow from someoneâ€™s eye socket below the eyelid when it had embedded in the fat above, and the arrow was buried deeply, with only the tip visible towards the shaft, and the arrow was large for a Turkish bow, made entirely of light iron without ears;
The joint was healthy, and no bad accidents occurred.
And he extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with wings:
I grasped the beard of the arrow, and I maneuvered carefully until I extracted it, and the Christian was healthy.
And I extracted an arrow from the man who had it embedded in his abdomen, and I thought he would die;
and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change; I cut around the arrow, handled it carefully, and forcefully removed it, and he did not suffer any bad accident.
And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow embedded in his back, and the wound is sealed over;
and the arrow remains inside him, and he does not change his natural disposition in any way, nor finds harm in any of his natural functions.
And if you wish to treat another man who has an arrow shot into his face, and the wound is sealed over; and remains in this state without suffering great pain;
and much the same with many others.
And treat an arrow in the prince's servant who had it embedded between his ears, and it was slightly inclined toward the right side; And the arrow was entirely buried.
I was called to treat her after she had been ill for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I examined her thoroughly and found nothing. and she felt pain and tenderness behind her right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I applied a plaster that would prevent inflammation in that area; and the location of the arrow became apparent.
and the location of the arrow became apparent. I applied the plaster for several days and then reopened the wound. The patient remained this way for a long time until he felt the arrow inside his nose for one day;
and he tells him to do it. I applied corrosive medication to the wound for several days until it was open, and I probed it, feeling the head of the arrow that was lodged there.
then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that corrosive medication until the head of the arrow became visible.
and the swelling around the wound subsided over four months, and then I cleaned it so thoroughly that I could use pliers on it, but the arrowhead would not come out.
then I did not stop trying and inventing various instruments until one day I managed to grasp it with well-made pliers, as described at the end of this chapter, and removed it, restoring the wound.
And the physician judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was completely healed.
I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so place your care on what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything into account;
but wise masters compare well with great knowledge, and for what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in the descent of strange things that occur in this art.
I say that the arrows exit from the members where they are embedded in two ways: where by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and the one that jumps out is where it entered, which is an arrow penetrating their flesh, and sometimes now it comes out immediately.
And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh around it is rotted, and the exit is clear;
and similarly if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days, and massage it each day;
and then it will come out on its own; and if it does not, make small incisions around the area with great care until the area around it is enlarged, and then extract it.
And if the arrow is hidden in the body where it cannot be seen, search for it throughout the entire body; and if you feel it, then draw it with some suitable instrument;
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut so that the wound is large;
and draw the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it holds, remove the flesh that is embedded from two sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can draw it;
and be careful that you do not break the arrow, which would make it harder to draw;
And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the area around the site is ripe, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood opposes you, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of cutting the nerve and the vein, and use caution as you carefully extract the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and place the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help there can be, and if you cannot, then place him as the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, where it is apparent some part of it remains, or the skin is swollen in such a way that it can be seen or felt clearly:
Then cut above where the pincers can grasp, and then extract: try now with force.
And if it is held by the bone, rotate your hand circularly until it enters the bone, then expand the bone, and pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then try the extraction again until it comes out;
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, cut it off along with the entire shaft;
and if the shaft falls off, and you wish to administer cautery, apply the instrument directly so that the arrowhead enters into the tip of the instrument;
and then force it out, and if the arrow is lodged, apply the instrument with the tip entering in, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the wound is, if you can, and then treat the wound as required.
And if the arrow falls into the thigh or in the belly or at the bladder or in the chest, and it is near, and you can cut above it;
and be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound if necessary; and care for it until it is healed.
The shape of the pliers used to treat arrows is like the beak of a bird, and see here the form:
And there are many methods: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the piercing needle is also like the quill of a bird, to pierce at the tip of the arrow, as shown here is the form:
There are 31 veins from which one can bleed to treat, of which there are 16 in the head, namely: Two blows which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries which are in the two apparent temples; and two veins that are in the temples of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the two jugulars which are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one usually bleeds are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side, and laypeople call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and laypeople call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and laypeople call it "vein of the belly," and it is near the fossa, and this is the vein from which one usually bleeds, which appears clearly on the forearm.
And the saphenous vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is behind the bend of the left shin, and the second is on the right ankle; and the vein called "nesse," which is on the other ankle;
and in the other leg there are three veins behind those.
The vein behind the ears helps with chronic catarrhs and headaches;
And the qualities of the surgeon, as I tell you, are that he should raise the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck to a rope, so that the two veins behind the ears appear in two places dependent on the head: press them then with your finger, and where you feel the pulse below your finger, make an incision;
then take the lancet and insert it below the vein to the bone, then raise your hand along the entire length of the vein, cut through both the skin and the vein deeply two fingers wide, and let out as much blood as you wish;
Then strain and bind it until it is healed;
and I have already mentioned the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The treatment of the two arteries that are in the two temples is valuable for chronic migraine, cluster headache, and habitual ophthalmic conditions, and for aqueous humor disorders of the eyes;
and the qualities of the healer are as I say: and the patient should strain their neck until the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse below your nostril, and then take it from there;
Then lift the heart above the vein towards your index finger, insert the lancet below, and lift the vein up, and cut it, as you did with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
Then release the patient and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then bandage it firmly, and leave it until it is healed;
and we have already spoken about their incision and extraction at the beginning of the book.
The vein on the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic vein for treating ancient face diseases, and for migraine, and redness;
and the quality is such that the patient twists their neck, so much that the vein becomes tight; then take the instrument called "fosser," here is its form:
And place the tip on the vein, and press firmly with your hand or something else, and let blood flow out according to the amount you wish; then release the patient's neck, and tie off the vein until it is secure, sometimes doing this with a flame of a width.
Nevertheless, it must not be that the flame is too sharp; and cut across the vein, as the bone is nearby, and by chance the flame might break when it is fine.
The salve of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps with the eyes, and for the tine (lice infestation), and for redness, and for white spots in the eye, and for ailments of the face;
and the quality of its application is that the patient should strain their neck by twisting with some kind of bandage, as before;
then apply the salve, and let it be applied thinly, a little lengthwise like a flame, a little wide, because there is no flesh there. And if the flames are fine, they might break;
then let the blood flow, as much as you need, and then cover with cloth, and bind it well.
The bloodletting from the vein of the nose is good for fever, and for mad thirst, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old;
and the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient pinches his neck, then pinches his nose with your left hand, and take a fine flame long, and place it between the two nostrils, for the vein does not appear clearly, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then tie it for a night, for it is quickly restored;
The salve of the two binders helps in constricting the wound, at the beginning of mixing ingredients, and for many diseases, and for empetigines, and corrosives, and herpes, and abscesses;
and the properties of the salve are such that the patient constricts their neck below one and the other, as we have said;
and let the master stand over the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then cut open the vein slightly widely, then draw some blood moderately, as much as is necessary;
Then do it again on the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and moderately compress all veins so that the patient does not suffocate; and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
of the salve of the leaves The healing of the veins above the lips helps in swelling of the mouth, and decay of gums, and splits of the lips, and nose, and around.
And the quality of treatment is to have the patient sit before you and compress their neck as I said; then turn the lip and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and you can recognize them by their black color and by the small black veins around them:
so then press both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, press the largest on each side, and similarly do this for the two veins above and below, because it is the same method.
From the sickness draw out the tongue The healing of the veins that are below the tongue aids after the healing of the cephalic vein, and it is at the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the healer are such that the patient urinates into your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and you look below on each side for a black vein:
treat then one and the other, but do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
The veins of the elbow that are commonly treated are treated in two ways:
either by pressing along the entire blade which is as thin as an olive leaf, and sharp like cutting knives, and it is called "anesil"; And they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the minor flame is much renowned, and it is as wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are full of thick, visible blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
and it is finer in shape, and is used to treat fine veins, where there is fine yellowish blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids in diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen;
and it is necessary for the physician to bleed wisely, and to avoid the artery which is below. And if he cuts the artery, and blood flows out, then it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have said; and must not prick the flame, but cut as before.
And if the basilica is not clearly apparent, then you must extract it, and change to another one; where you want some part of it, or heal in its place the vein on the arm: it appears clearly; and the cup to the flame as before, as we have said.
And if you want to know the place of the injury, then it is necessary that you pull the arm, and touch the area until you feel the pulse; Then mark the site of the fracture, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein on the inside. and be careful not to hit the artery when you see the area swollen, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it flowing out as thick as a child's urine, and the blood is red and fine, know that this is arterial blood: hurry then, and place your finger firmly, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, as this often happens; bind the arm, and leave it like that, and do not let the patient move it;
And let him be in fear, and do not move it until he is well.
And if the patient is not restrained, and you need to, and no medicine is present, then cut the artery if it appears, for the head will follow. And restrain the patient.
And take the skin of a fig, and cut it, and take one of the halves and apply it well until the other day;
if the patient is restrained, it is good; if not, then treat him as we have said, with powders that restrain blood;
And the stiffness is not serious in many positions due to the small area of the wound, and the strength of the arm's ligament.
The median vein in the middle helps to carry blood from the head above and the body below, as it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to be cautious near the nerve that is below, and if he cuts too deeply, and should he encounter the nerve, it will swell and the patient may suffer severely, and perhaps he cannot heal.
And this nerve is often visible, but if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, then you must use a blunt instrument to avoid it. And avoid the nerve as much as possible.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make the incision along its length.
The bloodletting of the cephalic vein helps to draw blood from the head and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to bleed by puncturing the cephalic vein or the basilic vein, because this is the safest of all veins, as it has no nearby nerves or arteries. Nevertheless, it is necessary to find the most gentle spot, and do not worry if it is not possible to do so the first time, and repeat. and sometimes the area swells in some people when it is done for the first time, but it does no harm.
The quality of the salve is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about healing is that healing is not aimed at anything other than preserving health and avoiding future illnesses;
and the healing should be performed on one of the three veins that are in the arm: which are specifically, the cephalic, facial, and basilic veins; and it should be done at the beginning of spring until midsummer, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear;
and it should be done on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
The surgeon who treats diseases has no fixed time, but when the need arises for day or night, at all hours and in all times;
and it is not appropriate to operate on children until they are fourteen years old, nor on women carrying a fetus from the fourth month until the seventh. One should not treat the elderly who have surpassed sixty years of age.
And when someone wishes to be operated on, in whatever manner, it is necessary for them to cleanse their intestines with a mild enema if they have much retained feces, so that the veins do not attract from the intestines harmful superfluities to the principal members;
and one does not operate on those who are overly full of meat, nor on drunkards, until they are sober, nor on hydropics;
And if one uses bloodletting after colic pain, and vomiting, and expulsion of gas from the stomach, and excessive sexual activity, and labor, staying awake and fasting, and all these things whether by weapons or by the body;
then carefully thin the humors if the blood is thick, through food and drink and medicine, if you have the ability to do so;
then enter the bath if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood, and bleed from the vein of the arm around the elbow, as we have said;
and keep yourself free of work, and labor, and lust, and similar things that day;
and be tied and joined, and let the binder be higher than the one being treated, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the bandage moderately, for if it is too tight or loose, blood cannot flow properly;
and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt;
then moisten the binder with a little oil, then place the thumb of his left hand on the vein slightly below the area where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not sink when pricked.
For there are veins that sink like cords when the binder is applied, and some are full of air, so that when pressure is applied, they retract, and thus the vein cannot be opened. And if he operates on the vein, and the wound is too narrow, then it is necessary that the surgeon be cautious in these matters.
And if he operates on the vein the first time, it is good; if not, then begin again a little below that place or quickly above it, if the area is not swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient is afraid, leave it for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: by chance, abscesses may come;
do not enter the bath, then resume the treatment if it pleases him;
and if the opening is small, or the blood flows thinly and you doubt that it will not flow as much blood as you wish, then apply the cautery directly to that opening with all the flame.
and work it slightly quickly so that the area becomes swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the area swollen, do not continue the bleeding, and put a little linseed oil on it, for it draws blood from the body, and the linseed is soothing in this place.
and thus administer the linseed oil after each time you bleed the veins to stop the flow of blood;
and the same thing causes thorns and boils when it is placed in its place; so delicately open and divide it when it is too large.
And if a large abscess comes, which happens many times, especially when the bleeding from the vein is not sufficient at the time of opening, then hurry and place on the area a sponge moistened with warm water and vinegar, and press it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if black or green discoloration remains in the area after some days, it does no harm; And if you wish, apply something of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mastic, or similar.
And often there is an abscess and appearance of pain in the joint of the heel:
Place your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft under the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is harmful. Avoid applying anything from what we have mentioned, for it might cut into the artery;
but apply the dry plaster to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And draw out the blood from each according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it continue until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, allow it to cool.
And for one who is full and robust, and needs bloodletting, make the incision wider, and let the flaps be wide;
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed in small amounts but frequently, and this should be done by cutting diagonally, not vertically;
and this method of bleeding is safe from excessive blood loss and damaging nerves, and it is better than long or wide cuts.
And for him to whom the body is lacking strength, it is necessary to give moist bread in pomegranate juice; If he is heated, let blood three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, before the meal give him moist bread in muscat syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and sweet-smelling syrup.
And if he faints after losing much blood, it is necessary that he drinks broth of meat, and subtle aromatic syrup, and uses other things which we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to bleed his arm and faint again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bleeds little by little according to the quantity of his continued strength.
And who wishes to bleed his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, he should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And who wishes to bleed from another place, should bleed on the second day or the third.
For he has much blood within the body which is already heated, and it causes fever; so it is necessary to draw a large quantity of blood, and widen the aperture until it flows freely in palms; Once you have fulfilled all the conditions for bleeding, and place your hand on the pulse when it bleeds, so that death does not occur in place of fainting, which often happens when the bloodletter is negligent;
and it is not right when you want to dislocate the arm and let blood a second time, and the puncture is closed, that you press forcefully upon it; nor if it is curved, should he extend the arm quickly, for that would be harmful;
but let him do so until it bleeds again the second time; where you should apply the tip of the flame until the blood that has congealed at the vein puncture releases, and place on it a piece of lint soaked in water, and press lightly upon it.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so from the same vein, or from another vein, or from the other arm.
The vein on the arm is bled in place of the head vein because it is composed appropriately.
And the method of treatment is such that the patient puts his hand in hot water, until the phlegm becomes red;
then it should be tied moderately, so that the veins constrict well, then treat it now from the side, not from the wide or long direction;
and let the opening be wide, and treat it well near the joint of the hand, and if blood does not come out, put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
and if it is in summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, for it is done more in winter than in summer;
and the vein of this artery is safer than all other veins, as there is no artery or nerve.
The vein from the salvation of the right hand is effective for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
strain the hand, and immerse it in hot water until the vein swells, so that it can be seen; and if the vein crosses, and you cut it completely, nothing will be harmed;
and do not go too deep, for the nerves are completely bare of flesh, and then immerse the hand in hot water if the blood has clotted in the wound, so that it may flow.
And when you have drawn blood as much as is necessary, apply oil and wax to seal it quickly, and do this for each vein.
The treatment of the left hand vein is good for the disease of the spleen, and do it exactly as I have told you for the right.
The sinew of the sophene is effective against all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the thigh, retention of urine, disease of the thighs and legs, old diseases of the calves and legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of its treatment is that the patient immerses their foot in hot water, and rubs over the vein until it dilates, and ties above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there flow many veins;
treat then at the widest vein, at the ankle, for it is worth more.
And if you treat it on the foot, beware of the nerves which are below, and cut through as if slicing;
and let the flamen be cold.
And if the blood cannot come out, place the foot in a bath of hot water, and allow the vein to be thoroughly opened.
And if the treatment fails the first time, then begin again slightly above it the second time, for the place is salty;
Do not worry about nerves, as we have said, and do the same for the corresponding bone of the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its incision relieves hip pain when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of his condition is such that the patient enters the bath, and presses four fingers above the ankle, because otherwise the vein does not appear;
and if it appears, then heal it in all ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is better that you cut it, because the location is hidden, and it is very responsive to many people.
and it is better that you cut it, because the location is hidden, and it is very responsive to many people. And if you do not find it, then heal any vein that appears on the back of the foot and near the small toe, and be careful of the nerves;
Let the blood flow as much as you wish, then loosen the bandage, and put on cotton and bind it. She is now healed.
Cupping glasses are made of horns, or earthenware, or glass;
and cupping is performed in accordance with two methods: either by striking to draw blood or without striking.
And this cupping which is done without striking is according to two methods: either it is done over fire or without fire;
And ventilation which is done by striking and extracting blood is done in fourteen parts of the body, of which one is entirely on the head. and another is on the neck; and two others on each side of the neck; and the suction cup under the chin; and the suction cups on both shoulders; and the suction cups on the buttocks; and the suction cups in both arms; and the suction cups on both legs; and the suction cups of the two ankles;
and the cupping does not draw blood, except from small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken a person at all, as is done with venesection; and it should not be administered, nor with any fire or hot application, in any disease that comes from congestion, until the entire body is emptied.
And if it is necessary due to illness or by habit, we administer cupping at each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and also in every season;
for there are those who, when they need cupping, have a heavy head;
and there are those who encounter swelling and redness in their face, and in their head, and darkness in their eyes;
and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and spit blood; and there are those who dream, and see in their sleep blood and wounds and deaths and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we instruct them to use ventose after three hours of the day.
The salve of the muzÃ© helps with the headacheâ€¦ that comes to the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of the entire body;
and this ventilation is in place of the salve of the cephalic, and it should not be used by those with a cold constitution, or who have catarrh, for it causes them great harm;
And for this reason it is not appropriate for old people to use them, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
And those who become too frequent in this treatment may become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping slightly lower due to the risk of forgetfulness.
The ventosity on the neck is in place of the headache and of the occiput, and for this reason it is useful for constriction of the stomach, and for splitting of the channel of the pharynx, and for all, and for repletion;
and it is appropriate to gently press on it, for if it holds too firmly, it causes obstruction in the stomach and heart.
The ventosities on the two sides of the neck are useful for headaches, and ophthalmic pain and migraines, and for choking, and for pain at the roots of the teeth, and they are in place of the occipital headache;
And you must instruct the surgeon to press his hand when placing it, that he does not cut the artery, and there is no bleeding out of place.
The ventilation below the chin is beneficial for mouth diseases, and for the decay of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is located at the point where the two lips meet.
The ventosation of the shoulders is useful for diseases that come from heat and swelling.
The ventilation of the armpit is as valuable as that of the three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the area is bare of flesh, and it lies near nerves and arteries.
The suction cup that is on the rump corresponds to the hemorrhoids of the anus, and to diseases below it, and it must be large, and made of bronze, so that it can draw well; and if it were too thin, it might break; and large wounds are made there.
The suction cups on the legs draw strongly, for they attract blood from the entire body, and are effective for chronic pains in the thighs, and of the joints, and of the bladder, and reduce swelling;
and they are placed at the two soles, and at the two ankles, and over time they weaken the body, and can lead to fainting in various conditions.
The method of applying the cupping glass is to first place it empty, then temper it with heat, and put it on quickly, moving it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the spot red and swollen, and afterwards the redness of the blood;
then apply heat again and replace the cupping glasses, and pay attention to the condition of the skin, for there are those who have thin flesh, and clear pores: it is necessary to cut only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and somewhat deep; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to cut twice: The first time to make the way of thick blood subtle.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to pierce for the third time;
and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only need to do it once. And if we want to draw much blood, we should start multiple times;
and if the blood is thick, pierce deeply, and end it so that the patient feels punctured suddenly, and for those with thick skin and hard tissue, who have small pores, you should anoint the spots where the cups will be applied with oil that opens and dissolves: If it is in a state, of violet oil, or almond oil, or cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in winter, of sorrel oil, or lettuce oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take marjoram oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar.
And if the person being treated has tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied, but they should be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelainflower water, or similar.
And those who have much moisture, let them rise from ease, or with myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses rise from old wine, or juice of maple, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar.
and it is not appropriate to bleed with suction cups before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours;
and do not sleep after the suction, and it is necessary that he walks when he should be bled with suction cups and when he has been treated.
And watch if the person who is bleeding has a choleric temperament, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed; then it is necessary for them to take cold things, such as sour apples, endive, and lettuce grown in the shade, and similar things; and drink poultices, and eat quail meat, and moist meats.
and drink poultices, and eat quail meat, and moist meats. And for those with a cold constitution, let them take syrup of honey, and aromatic wine that is half old and half new, and drink broth, and eat quail and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day they will be cupped, they should drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give some people thyme or nutmeg before windiness, or after, to comfort the main limbs; And let the blood be thinned, but those who are hot should not drink it.
The cups that are placed without cutting are those placed over the liver, and over the spleen, and for gout, and over the belly and buttocks and thighs and hip, because these members do not tolerate being cut, and we only use them to draw blood from one member to another, as we place them over the breasts when a baby is sucking.
to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place cups on the belly and buttocks to reduce the size of the member;
And remove the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, as by its attractive virtue it might remove the obstruction, or dislodge the stone from its place;
And it does this when applied to the liver and stomach in cases of retained wind, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck up only that; And sometimes they are administered together with fire, and at other times filled with hot water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in such a way that the suction cup is filled with hot water or water in which appropriate herbs have been boiled.
The form of the cupping vessel administered by fire is thus:
And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm in length, and at the circumference around the middle there is one small hole, as if to insert a needle, and it should be made of linen, thin enough so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
And place in the middle a crossbar of linen or iron, to hold an oil lamp securely, and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who use them;
for the suction cups for children are different from those for the elderly, and for the thin from those for the fat.
And one must place this suction cup on the limb as follows:
take the candle of wax or salve, and place it inside the suction cup across the bar that is in the middle of the suction cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the suction cup so it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and your hands should be over the opening we mentioned, so that when you want to, the steam goes in, and remove the suction cup;
And imprint the linen as before, and repeat it often, if you have need.
In the cupping treatment for pleurisy, at all stages, there is no rod or hole, and it is not applied except when it is full of liquid, and it is placed on the limb solely.
and this is the form:
Cupping is not applied except to members where cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as the lips and gums, and similar areas; and in exposed parts of the body, such as the chest or back, and others like them;
and the quality of the urine is such that when you find blood that is in mild fevers clear without sediment, take it;
and place them in mild urine until they become familiar and have nothing in their bellies; and then let them be treated with venesection and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply the blood;
and when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where cupping can be applied, apply it, for this will be very beneficial afterwards.
If not, lift the area gently and then wet it, very well, and then press it;
And if the wounds heal too quickly along the body, moisten the linen cloth with cold water and apply it until the wound is stretched out.
And if the wound is multiplied, apply ground vitriol, or gallnuts, and similar things until it is stretched out;
Place half of the shelled beans on the wound, and leave them until they heat up at the site, then it will now be staunched;
And if you need more, take other wounds.
And if the wounds do not wish to be taken, rub the site with fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle until the wound releases blood, and then apply them, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will heat up;
And when you see that they are falling, sprinkle some powder of aloes and salt ground up, or ash, so now they will fall.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Beware, foolish doctor, that they throw themselves into this chapter, having never seen any of the ancient books, nor read any letters about it;
and for this reason the science is estranged in our land, because I have never found any good one;
and I know nothing except through the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I now understand the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life;
and I have clearly described in this chapter what is contained, and summarized it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two preceding chapters.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the essentials of speech and the chapters where the wise man places his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or wrenching occurs to anyone, you must hasten to bleed the patient on both sides, if nothing else prevents it, such as weakness of body, children, or elderly; or if the time is not very hot, or too cold;
and use cold things, that is to say cold baths, and meat of birds and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess, or spread of matter in the limb;
so that the patient returns to sounder management than he has used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause thick nutrition, such as viscosity, like boiled wheat in water, and rice, and head of fish, and feet, and belly of pork, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For such nutrition helps the healing and the broken bones heal more quickly.
And know that the broken bones of old and infirm people cannot be well set or mended according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but it does not matter, reset the broken bone with thick padding that adheres and joins the limb together, as long as it strengthens as it was before; and do not allow him to eat too little of his food, and for this reason he must be fed rich foods, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the hip, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the marrow, and another in sharpening, like the shaft of a writing quill.
For there is a fracture that goes to the marrow, and another in sharpening, like the shaft of a writing quill. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that is just a small crack.
And each method has its instrument, and its proper tool in the restoration, according to what memory brings to mind;
And a bone fracture is known by its distortion, and it is clearly apparent by its displacement, and sounds hollow when pressed with the hand;
And when there is no distortion or sound upon pressing, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
But it may still have distortion, or a crack, or a small fracture. It is not right to move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that follow hereafter, and then hold it firmly now gently.
And know that the fracture that goes through the bone, and where the two parts are separated, they must now be set equally, as if for deep abscesses.
and if there are deep abscesses, let it rest for some days until the abscess is resolved;
Then place it even with the wound so that you can gently and wisely, and know that its restoration is lighter than those where there are pieces.
Then compress it as is appropriate next.
And if the bone is broken into pieces, then hold it from two parts, if it is an arm or foot, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, you carefully return all the fragments to their places in the wound as much as you can, and ensure that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
and place well the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
set it properly, and do not pull or press too hard, as those who cause heat and contraction in the limb through their work often do, as we have witnessed many times.
And when the limb is properly set, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and ensure that the limb is securely fastened so that it does not feel any pain. For when it causes any pain, it is not yet right, and it must be placed in such a position that no pain is felt;
and ensure that the limb is securely fastened so that it does not feel any pain. For when it causes any pain, it is not yet right, and it must be placed in such a position that no pain is felt; and ensure that it is placed correctly, so that no curvature occurs when it is restored;
and the condition of the broken limb should be as I have told you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in size and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and thumbs and similar ones: they should be wrapped in soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
they should be wrapped in a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandages encompass the entire large limb, and compress it equally from all sides, so that there is no slack.
Then wrap with light clamps, three or four turns according to the member, and pull your hand slightly on all the ligature, then go above the fracture and tighten less, so that the fracture moves apart a little.
and loosen the ligature little by little until you secure a large part of the healthy area, then take another ligature and wrap around again above the fracture;
then go back to the part below the fracture and tighten moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we said in the first chapter above;
then place cotton or cloth pads between the ligatures so that they are all even, then wrap everything with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply a hot soothing poultice for the abscess and one that reduces swelling, and leave it like this for several days;
then apply it to your fingers, and let them be half the width of a handspan, or made of wood used for splints, or from palm fronds, and shape them according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the splint placed over the fracture be slightly thicker and wider than the others;
and it should be as long as is necessary for the size of the limb; then apply it to the splints as you did in the first hour, then wrap a bandage around it as you did in the first hour over the fracture; closer above, immediately farther;
and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be soft flax;
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the work of fools who make their stitches with twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, because the suture cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it is not right that there should be less than two widths of space between each stitch.
And if the patient is pierced by the points of the stars after binding them in their sinews, place below them linen plugs or wool fluff so that they do not become inflamed.
When the wound is with the breaker, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
And you should know that it is not appropriate to extract all the broken members' splinters on the first day. For when the limb is large, it does not suit to put stitches in until after five days or seven, or more according to your judgment of a hot abscess arising.
And see here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
And take flour that is kept near the mill wall, and mix it abundantly with eggs, and apply this preparation neither too thick nor too thin, and use it, and this is the common method of plaster for restoring fractures in various positions, especially for women and children, because it is not too costly or cold.
Another method of plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take mastic, storax, ammoniac, asafoetida, gum arabic, and myrrh, in quantity X. Myrrh and aloes, take V Ð—.; Alechil IX Ð—.; and make powder, and mix it with the yolk of an egg; if the constitution of the person is hot, then use this plaster, for it is well composed and quickly restores broken bones, and is beneficial to many people.
Another method of plaster that is effective for sprains: take mugwort and valerian, take X Ð—.; myrrh and aloes, take IX Ð—.; Chapter VI; boil the Armenian compound X, and grind it well, and mix it with water or egg white, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and bones out of place, which alleviates the ensuing pain, and the use on bone wounds, and fractures: take new wool, and boil it in oil, and apply it to the area.
These plasters do not heal, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and properly relieve pains.
Another method of plaster which restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and herbain leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to make a plaster for the healing of bone fractures and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of vervain, chamomile, violets flowers, flour of oats, of each one part;
and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Another way of making an ointment stronger than the first one, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vervain, and seeds of flax, plum, melilot, and saffron, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all an equal part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates states in his book that one should not place anything on a broken limb to restore strength except for plaster made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be neither too hard nor too soft.
And it seems Galen says that one should place dry and slightly warm things on a broken limb to restore it, such as myrrh, aloes, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plaster that is effective for injury and pain: Take mutton fat and human hair cut short, or bird feathers, and woundwort, and mix them equally, and crush them, and make a poultice from it and apply it.
Then loosen it slightly after that, and be careful if the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of place; do not loosen it by hand for days. And if pain comes to the area, or itching, with no relief or swelling, then hurry, and loosen it, and remove the poultice now;
and take a light cloth, and a sponge soaked in seawater, and dip it in water, and apply it to the area until the itching stops, and the pain is eased; Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it up with a bandage until you are sure of a hot abscess;
and reduce the inflammation of the member, and relieve its pain, then restart the gentle treatment, and a little plaster, and do not stretch it so forcefully as before; and treat gently until he is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is red and swollen and painful and has been emptied of everything inside, and you need to apply a poultice and bandage, then restart as you did initially equally.
And if the member shows no improvement from what we have said, do not attempt to reset it until after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is observed, until the swelling subsides, and the bone edges approach each other;
then he restrains himself more than before, and fattens his flesh, as I said before;
and if you see the place drying more than necessary, know that no new flesh can come there; then give him warm water to drink every time you loosen him, and do this every third day, and slightly loosen the bandage;
by this work then you prevent the new flesh from forming on the limb, and quickly correct what the foolish doctor does, who immediately sets the injured limb:
it is harmful, and such work is dangerous, and I see nothing else but to leave it alone and treat it properly.
There are many ways bones can break, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
for there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the bone is shattered completely to the surface beneath the skin, like splitting wood or a staff; and for this reason this type of fracture is called "splitting";
When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, this type of fracture is called "absolute";
and the injury from these two fractures can be large or small.
And if there is an embedded impact, or a split from a stone, or falling on a stone, or other similar occurrences.
And if there is a perforating fracture, which approaches as far as the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And there is a wound that lies in the bone as fine as a hair, and the crack is small, and for this reason it is called a "hairline" fracture;
And if the wound that is made by hitting a stone, or falling, or similar things, causes a piece of bone to go in below, and the place is covered as blacksmiths do when they work on cauldrons; and the stone goes inside.
And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their head, such as the head of a child;
and in all these ways of breaking, small pieces are separated as splinters; and I will speak about it in its place.
And we recognize all kinds of fractures by the depression on them, and through examination with probes, and by the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The hair-like appearance is known when, after exposing the bone and rubbing it, the fracture appears clearly black.
In the treatment of a fracture, be mindful of any adverse reactions of the patient, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsions, fainting, intermittent fever, and the eyes protruding and turning red, along with other similar conditions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any alarming symptoms and hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounded person comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day from the wound so that you can.
And if it is in summer, then you must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not become corrupted, and avoid the accidents we have mentioned.
And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part as follows:
And it is that you take hold of the head of the patient so that they are in pain, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound as deep as you can, and if blood flows out upon discovering the bone, or an abscess appears, give assistance accordingly, and it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in rose oil; And let the wound rest until the abscess is alleviated, and be assured of the cessation of bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to two methods of work:
one method is that you cut tightly around the incision ahead, and this is the form:
And then make the second cut larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have different sizes of cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron;
and work gently so that you do not bruise the head.
And if the bone is hard and protruding, then you must pierce around it, thus applying cuts with files, not deeply enough to penetrate the soft bone of the head, and should have above the tip a margin or circle that prevents the tip from passing beyond the bone;
and you should have several of them, so that each one fits in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have files for the entire head;
and this is the form of the three methods of cauterizing:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is to place one cautery on the bone, and turn it until you know that the bone is pierced;
then place the cautery slightly apart again, and do this all around, then cut between the perforations with an incision, and do this more delicately than you can, lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone with your hand, or with any of the tools you have such as forceps, pincers;
and be careful not to touch the brain or the dura mater.
And when you have pierced the bone, and extracted it, then you must resharpen the tool that was used on the bone to be like an incisor, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other incisors;
and if any small bones or scales remain, remove them gently with the instrument; then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have described.
And the other method of work is that which Galen described, which is more skilled; and he praises it greatly, and this is his saying. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture begins to show, so that when you have uncovered this part, you place beneath the head of this knife with a lens-shaped form:
And do not cut from one side, and the part to be cut is on two sides, so that the cutter is near the bone;
then strike gently with a small hammer so that you lightly cut around the bone, and be very careful of the membrane underneath;
if it is attached to the bone, remove it gently, for it should be removed without harm, and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the skin, and the bone is only cut slightly from above, with small pieces present, then behind that roughness, remove the scales with a fine scraper of which you must have various quantities, in order to treat each place most suitably according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Use larger scrapers first, and then finer ones, and continue doing this until it is well done.
In each of the other hair cuts and subtle fractures, you should treat according to their nature;
and this is something that is not easily answered by one who has devoted their study to this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another piece of linen doubled in two or three layers, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first piece of linen; and apply it as lightly as you can so that you do not burden the wound, then administer another layer over it, and do not press too hard except to cover the wound entirely;
and leave it like this for one or two days until the swelling subsides, then remove it and apply medications such as roots of lilies, flour of oats, powder of incense, aristolochia, and similar things;
And from these things make powder, and apply it to the wound, and then administer medicines without incision.
And ensure that the wound is kept clean, do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow pus to accumulate, because when pus accumulates on the brain tissue, it can cause infection and bring great harm to the patient.
For when something caustic is applied to the surface, it should be covered over it. Therefore, take care if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackening does not occur except from the medicine that has been applied, then you should take one part honey, three parts rose oil, and add one ounce of it to glue, and apply it to the surface. then the care of methods of treatment as he needs, so that he is healthy.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the skull above are broken, either both or just one, because there are two bones;
and the one behind is cartilaginous and does not break, but can be bent or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your small finger into the hole in the skull and place the break exactly according to the shape of your finger inside, and on the outside with a poultice, until the skull heals according to its natural form; and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the anus, and your probe cannot reach that place, then you must place it equally at the head of a vein slightly thick.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then act similarly, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can.
unless it is on the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling of the abscess has subsided, then apply to the head of the neck cloths of linen if the fracture is in one part.
Where you apply another from the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the cloths be thick enough to fill the openings of the neck.
And some doctors say that the tents should be moistened with butter, and changed each day. It does not seem right to me that they should be wetted in a preparation of egg white, and powdered miller's flour; Then leave the wound covered until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes one puts goose feathers in place of bandages, and if there is a gentle breeze around, it keeps the wound clean, and the patient breathes through them; do as you see fit.
And if abscesses come to the nose while you are working on them, apply plaster or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a bit of myrrh.
And if abscesses do not form, apply a plaster around it, made of ground sesame seeds and powdered frankincense, mixed with an egg white, then put on light dressings, and do not bind the wound tightly;
and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments, then sew up the wound, and treat with substances that heal flesh and bind, such as plasters and appropriate ointments;
and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents, and place bands of cloth, until he is healed.
When the mandible is fractured away and there is no wound to exit, and the fracture is only inside, not split into two pieces, except for cracks within, one can easily recognize it.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you place your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then place your index finger of the right hand, and press the fracture gently, and secure it with the other hand from behind, and make it even.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is separated into two parts, you must administer an extension to both sides until they are equal.
And if the movement of teeth occurs, or a fracture, then pull them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place wax on the broken jawbone, and put on two layers of cloth; And place upon the cloth a large stick well made, or a piece of leather even, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it up so that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the condition changes, then release it on the third day, and then reset precisely what has changed; and apply a plaster on top, of the powder from the mill with plenty of egg or ground cumin, after you have removed the wax;
and place a light wool over the plaster, and if the plaster adheres and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until they are well; Often it heals in three weeks.
And if small abscesses come, then treat them as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, check if any piece of the bone has been removed; use appropriate instruments to carefully remove it.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, then sew the wound closed if it is wide, and apply suitable plasters to it, to promote flesh growth until it is healed.
The collarbone fractures multiple times before the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
where it is broken and separated into two parts with fragments, and this is the easiest to restore;
where there is a fracture with a wound.
And when the fracture is without a wound, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the collarbone is broken; and extend the neck towards the affected part;
then align the fracture with your hands so that the form is as it should be, and there be no appearance or change.
And if you need to extend it further, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth, or wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity; and extend and lift the arm, and hold the ball with your hand so that you align the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out due to its position, then the patient should lie supine on their back, and place a medium-sized pillow under the shoulder, and push the shoulder down by the minister, until the bone of the collarbone is raised.
And then align the fracture with your hands, and if you find it fragmented, you must cut into it;
and gently pull the bones, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, cut it with one of the scalpel blades that you have; but place aside this instrument to protect the surface:
and it appears like a spoon, and is not toothed, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength required for the task;
and it should have two edges, as you see, with one being wide and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound you made when treating the bones;
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, sew the wound closed, and if the opening is small and you suspect a hot abscess, cover the wound with cloths and tents according to its size.
And if pus comes from an abscess, moisten the cloth in rose oil and vinegar and apply it.
The binding of the bone when it is without wounds and without cutting should be that you put on the bone the plaster made from powder from the mill and yolk of an egg, and place light wadding over it, and put a pad under the bandage if you need one; then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then place the doubled cloth over the wadding, and apply the plaster; then take a slender stick three digits wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and place the stick on the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, under the healthy shoulder, and under the injured shoulder; and reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the break properly, and you clearly see that the bone does not move over the broken piece, then examine it each day, and when the ligaments loosen, then secure them;
and have the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under his armpit when he sleeps, to raise the shoulder up; this will ease the fracture of the collarbone by lifting the shoulder, tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, until twenty days;
then restart the plaster if you see it is necessary, and bind it and leave it so, until he is restored;
and it is restored in twenty-eight days, and in fewer for some men.
Of the fracture of the shoulder
It rarely happens that the shoulder is broken either widely or in the middle, and one can only know this by touching it;
treat it according to the appearance of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
then place on the area powdered miller's flour with an abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put a double layer of cloth over it; then place a broad and fine splint over it, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if any part of the splint presses on the flesh anywhere on the shoulder, pad that area with linen bandages so that the splint lies evenly;
and then bind it tightly with a large bandage so that the bone does not move from its place, and examine the joint each day;
and every time it becomes loose, bind it again, and place the bone back into its proper position if it has moved, and have the patient lie on their side;
and the shoulder should be immobilized for twenty or twenty-five days.
And when this period is complete, then release it, and be careful, for it is not a bone that easily returns to its proper place.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes and is outside the chest, they cut it off, and do what we have said about reducing the fracture to treat a hot abscess.
of the fracture of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks upon removal.
And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines to the side, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks appetite, and sweats, and perhaps vomits blood, and the movement of the bone ends can be felt clearly.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies supine on their back, and place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and bring together the sides of both ribs with your hands, and gently do so in all ways possible, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then apply plasters and small rolls of fine salt, or another light substance, and wrap it in a cloth, securing it over the broken bone so that it does not move; and wrap the bandage evenly around the back, and tighten it gradually, and check each hour the tightness, and if it loosens, then retighten it;
And if it needs to be loosened, for corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and scrape off the plaster, and address what has come there by ways of treatment;
Then reapply the plaster, and press it until it is secure.
Of the fracture of the ribs
Know that the breakage of ribs occurs only in their thick parts behind the back, and at the top inwardly, and they bend inward only because they are smooth. and one can feel it well during examination of the back.
And the remedy is to place the fracture in an even position as is appropriate. Then apply the plaster, and bind it with a splint if you need to.
And if the breakage of ribs is inwardly displaced, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as in pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue; And it sharpens points, and quickly vomits much blood, and this is from severe illness, and the elderly have great difficulty with it.
And there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to expel wind.
We do not do this so that low abscesses do not come if they have not already come. And if they have come, then heal them.
And some say that one should place suction cups on the area to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; Nevertheless, there is concern that the suction cups may not attract the excesses to the area due to the disposition of weakness.
And some say to cover the area with wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to evenly distribute the poultice, then treat it according to the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone piercing the skin, and there is concern for the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the area of the broken rib, and place an instrument underneath to protect the surface;
And then one must cut the bone, gently scrape it, and then stitch together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if pus-filled abscesses come, place damp cloths soaked in rose oil on them.
and treat the affected area as is appropriate for an abscess, and have them lie on their side where they should, until it is healed.
and similarly to the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be well or not, observe if you see his hands weakened, swollen, and dead-colored, and he cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in many cases, and if they move and feel well when pinched and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the patient can be treated, if proper care is applied.
And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is sound or not, take care to see if the feet are weakened, and if there are symptoms which are in the hands, and on the back there is flatulence and involuntary evacuation;
and when it has been pressed upon its belly, there is involuntary evacuation. And when he is laid on his back and wishes to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is fatal: do not attempt to treat it.
And if these accidents do not occur to him, then the matter is lighter.
And the treatment is that you should observe if there is a hot abscess, then apply rose oil or egg yolk oil to the spine until it subsides;
Then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and secure it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let them sleep on that part where they feel the pain until they are healed.
And if any bone breaks, it is necessary to bind above the heart; and remove the bone, then stitch together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until it is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the joint," place your thumb from your left hand there and position it equal to your right hand as best you can, then apply the plaster and bandage, if necessary;
Then it is extracted, and if there are displaced bones, they cut them out, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the hip bone
It rarely happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, there is usually only a slight reduction in size at the top; and they cut it lengthwise, and it inclines inward, causing the patient pain at the site, along with swelling where it is broken.
And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above it, until you are above the break; and identify where the fracture is and its shape;
And if the fracture is only in the head, then set the fracture evenly, so that it returns to its natural shape.
And if the fracture is lengthwise, where it tilts inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have set it evenly, apply a plaster, then place a splint of wood or horn, and bind the fracture so that it does not move;
and pad the area under the ribs, so that the sides are even. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
And if hot abscesses come up, do not touch them, until the hot abscesses are calmed, and then apply what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and bind it as is appropriate, if there is no adverse effect;
of the fracture of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is what is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, one must restore it according to one of the two methods:
one of which is that you take one rod filled with moistening material, according to this form:
And tie the two ends with two ropes, and lift them up, and seat the patient on a chair;
then place the dislocated arm over the rod, until it reaches the armpit, and have it form a curve on the rod, then lift it with some heavy object or have someone hold it down;
Then place the splint equal to his hands together, so that the splint returns as it should.
And the other method is that you lift the patient onto his back, and tie the hand to his neck, then instruct two assistants that one pull what is above the fracture with both hands, and the other pull below at the joint, each stretching their part.
And if you wish that the extraction be stronger, then remove the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the tendons on its side.
And if the splint is close to the top of the shoulder, then you should place one band beneath the armpit, and the other towards the side, beneath the splint;
and likewise if the splint is towards the side, then place one band lightly, without strain, so that the splint remains equal on its place, and at the side;
Then place the splint equally as it should be, and secure it, unless abscesses occur.
And if abscesses occur, do not secure it until the seventh day, and place linen soaked in oil and rose oil, until the abscesses are appeased;
Then it is restrained, and the way to restrain it is to place the plaster on the fracture, then bring the arm up to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or the chest;
and apply the bandage, and restrain it on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a stable position, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has moved.
And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place on the fracture one splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint a space of two fingers, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers on each side;
Then pull up on the stars, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about fractures, more forcefully and less in pulling apart.
And if you see the setting of the bones and the compression, as we have said, when you are restoring the broken limb, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said;
then check the bandage every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur at the site, where the healing cannot reach the limb because it is too tight. If it is reduced, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, do not loosen it before three days or more, and have the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach;
and place under the shoulder a cushion filled evenly with wool, and observe every hour of day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, nor be softened the ligaments;
and if it is addressed by the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat that we mentioned before, in such a way that the meat is at first finely prepared; and when he begins to recover, it should be more substantial.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be treated for forty days in total; and then it must be loosened and administered baths and ointment medicines to heal the area;
And if the constriction is tight and stuck, then wait one day or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "humerus", of which one is small, and it is the one that contains the socket;
and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger;
by chance, only the large humerus may be broken, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small humerus is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, the healing is difficult, and more troublesome than when both are broken together.
If it is the small phalanx that is merely broken, then it must be gently extended and placed evenly.
And if it is the large abscess, then it must be squeezed more forcefully;
and lay it out on a cushion, and tie the poultice higher than the others, and place the smaller one lower than the other two, and let the patient lie crossed upon himself, and have the cushion in front of him raised, so that the patient does not suffer any labor.
then extend the assistants' arms to the side of his hand, or at the joint, and another assistant on the other side above.
And then place the patient evenly, according to his best form.
And if there are multiple fractures, place each piece in its proper position, and if any are displaced causing pain to the heart, and you cannot restore it to its proper position, then cut it out as we have said before.
And if with the instrument for wounds, I have spoken about it in the separate chapter; then take the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration abscesses occur, then apply a bandage made of rose oil and white wax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and apply the bandage gently, until the warm abscess is relieved.
And then remove the wax and apply a poultice of ground powder with plenty of egg, and place the plasters, with the one from the fracture being slightly thicker and wider than the others;
and note that there should be six plasters on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or in two;
and hold it tighter near the break than elsewhere, and gradually less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
and let the dressings that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread, of which it is made, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And examine the limb and its joint after several days. And if any bad incident occurs to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should rinse the limb with hot water until the itching is relieved;
and let the limb rest without being confined tightly.
And then resume the compression, and if the joint is weakened and the bone dislocated, or similar things, address them.
And be careful if the swelling cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a bit, and leave it like this for several days until the swelling can flow, and then compress it.
And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, do not loosen them until twenty days have passed.
When examining around, then place his hands on his neck, and let his necks be even, and beware of movement and shaking, and sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and sometimes in twenty days, according to the compositions and the strengths of the constitutions.
Of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and on both sides there are few fractures, and it rarely happens but many sprains occur.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sits cross-legged and sits squarely facing forward;
then place his hand on the extended cloth, and the attendants extend the broken bones, and make them even the marrow, until they are well joined;
and apply the plaster and bandages, if no abscess forms, then place a splint according to the size of the area; and wrap it in a piece of linen cloth.
And if the fracture is on the inner side near the base of the foot, make a pad of cloth and instruct the patient to bind it to their fractured foot; and then wrap it with a long piece of cloth, and make the splint as thick as the palm of the hand, and bind it securely as required.
And if the fracture is on the side, then you must place one pad above and another below the sole of the foot, so that the hand is open and straight, then bandage it quickly around the hand, and secure the binding between the two pads.
And if the fracture occurs at one of the bones on either side, and it is a comminuted fracture, set it evenly as required; and you press it with the palm, and if you wish place a small straight splinter to lift the fracture, and it does not move;
and if the fracture is in either of the other two, such as in the index finger or one of the others, align it equally, and bind it with the healthy finger next to it; tie them all together so that movement is prevented, or place a splinter on them, like in a bandage;
and be careful in the restoration and disposition of a hot abscess, and support those who come to it, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often fractured, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward;
And the restoration is such that one binds a bandage above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on their back, then each attendant extends their bandage equally on their side;
and this is when the fracture is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one bandage should be towards the hip, and the other bandages below the break.
And if it is near the knee, then the bandages should be near the knee, and the extension below;
then the physician should align the bone equally with both hands, so that it is according to its natural position, and then apply a plaster, and bind it, unless abscesses occur.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside before returning to your work and treatment; the ligature is made in such a manner.
You must wrap around the fracture one bandage thickly in two or three layers, and remove any excess, then position the leg so that the heels align with the root of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee underneath, with the ends of the thread above.
then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
Then place a cloth between the thigh and the calf to make the compression even, then begin binding tightly three times or four above the fracture; and as you go further up from the fracture, the binding is less tight;
then tighten the two threads you placed between the thigh and the calf, and bind three bands above them, then go back behind to the head of the thread until you reach the foot;
and bind it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or swelling occurs. And if it does occur, loosen it and address what happens, as we have said many times;
and if there are fragments of bone that cause pain, they must be removed, if possible; and if it cannot be done, then it is necessary to cut the area and extract the contents; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that splints must be applied, as with the shoulder and arm;
nevertheless, in this manner of restoration, the patient does no harm.
And know that the thigh is restored in 21 days, or a few less or more, according to the differences in temperaments.
Know that in the joint of the knee there is frequent bruising, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is only a crack, or an aperture, and it becomes like any wound, and feels as a wound, and this people feel well.
And the restoration is such that one sets equal the toes which are bent at their joints, until they are aligned as much as possible;
Then apply the plaster, and if needed, place a round splinter, and secure it as appropriate, then review all the arrangements we have mentioned for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions; Then apply to each injury what is appropriate for it until he is healed.
Of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is properly called "mustelz," and the other is called "foscile";
and any other type of fracture that occurs in the arm is treated similarly to the leg, and the treatment is the same as for the arm. And if both bones are broken together, then treat the leg from all sides.
And if the finer bone is broken, then turn it forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible; and turn away from it.
Then treat with extension, and place it evenly, and bind the splints equally;
but still, if the break is severe and there are many pieces, the extension should be gentler and lighter; and apply it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of wood that will support the leg from both sides, and let them run along the length of the leg from the knee down;
Then wrap with two layers one bandage above and below, and place it in the middle as well, so that at this point the leg cannot turn to either side, and thus it is secure;
and some apply one board along the length of the leg, and if it is wooden, they place it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly this is done in fractures where there is an open wound;
and move the leg each day to check for an abscess or other complications; treat it until it is healed.
of the fracture of the foot bones
At the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and at the two joints, and it happens that it breaks in many conditions.
And if a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones protrude one over the other, place the patient's foot on the ground as if they were going to walk, then now put your foot on top of theirs where the bones are raised, and then press so that they return to their places;
Then apply the plaster and plugs over it, and place under the belly of the foot a small tablet filled with two spoonfuls, then bind it tightly to the foot after wrapping it with cloths, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two is broken, restore them as we have said about those of the hand; Then place a splint on the broken toe according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then place under the foot the tablet that I mentioned, and bind it tightly;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken toes, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen cloth, and bind the tablet under the foot; and let them stand on top of the table to expose the belly of the thigh, so that it is well covered.
And you must not forget the other things that I said to the other surgeons, as we have mentioned; and attend to each incident as is appropriate.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bone of the woman's pelvis is broken, make her sit with her legs apart, then incline her towards the part of the back, and hold her from behind;
then fill the area of the woman's pelvis with cotton, and place in it as much as fits;
then help the woman stand up, and lift her back little by little, and then push the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the pelvis, and return the bone with the padding;
and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and thus do for seven days or thereabouts: the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie a tube to the opening, and insert the entire bladder into the body; then blow forcefully into the tube until the bladder is inflated inside: the body will return the fracture to its proper place;
then fill it with cotton and leave it this way for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have described for the hip bone;
And these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who puts his study and practice into it, and my book becomes clear.
For the fracture indicates in various positions the right way to restoration: Then understand it.
In the shaft, when it is broken, take a goose neck and insert the shaft into it; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days while wrapping around it, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be treated now, so that the treatments we have mentioned bear witness.
And if the wound heals, then staunch it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then restart the healing process at the same hour, or on that day, unless abscesses come.
And if abscesses come, then leave the restoration until a new day, until the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a harmful accident.
And if the broken bone is apparent on the exposed chest, then it must be set gently with your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extension is not available to match your hands, then use this iron instrument which is seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the physician to take III or IIII, according to what he needs for each treatment of fracture;
and let it be straight and somewhat thick, so that it does not bend under the pressure on the limb during your work, and sharp at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", for which it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the top of the visible bone; and push it in at once, until it fits, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone until the instrument can grip it.
And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, then cut off a piece with an appropriate instrument, such as a scalpel or saw, to your ability;
Then raise the part that is stuck in the bone of hardness and small splinters.
And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Place it back in its proper place, then moisten the area with black styptic wine, and do this properly if it is necessary. and do not apply plaster or anything else with oil to the wound, as it may cause putrefaction and corruption;
then administer bandages after you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not compressed with the fracture;
and many times foolish doctors have done this, and it has led to the death or corruption of the patient; And let the compresses be softer and lower than for other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that some harm may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then you should not apply hot coals to it; but wrap it instead with hard cloths in place of hot coals, and bind them.
And when you see after one or two days that the wound is producing pus, remove what you placed over it entirely, and put on healing salve, such as tetrahermion ointment and similar.
And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is healed and sound.
And the limb should be positioned in such a way that the pus flows down gently.
And if many days pass and it cannot heal but continues to produce pus, know that there are small pieces of bone, so you must probe the wound with a probe, and remove all these loose pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or any other form of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
And when the bone is broken and protruding from the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar cases involving large limbs, do not attempt to extract it, for many die in such attempts; instead, leave it until it becomes infected.
by chance it will fall off after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can;
and if you cannot, leave it as it is.
We often see this after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a terrible thing to see the shape of the limb; and by chance, the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care then if the bone is fresh: if the wound is fresh, administer astringent medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others; take any of these things or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with egg whites or with olive oil; and place them on the knot with plugs, and bind tightly, and do not loosen it at any time;
and place them on the knot with plugs, and bind tightly, and do not loosen it at any time; and then dislocate it, and start again with another one until the knot is removed;
where you bind over a well-made piece of cloth; for the properties of the cloth are such that they remove all swellings from the limbs;
and if the knot has already hardened like a stone and needs to be removed, then cover it with a cloth, and the excess will become apparent; where you refer it to a barber to remove it completely, and continue treating it until it is healed.
of the limb which is weak after recovery
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate afterwards, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and the limb could not properly undergo treatment; or due to excessive bleeding; or because of too much movement, not at the right time; or because they have little blood in their body, so they are weak.
And the treatment is that you should make the patient eat, and soften the body, until the blood is multiplied within him; and the minister bathes him, and gives him joy and ease;
then applies pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts the swelling, and frequently rinses it with cold water, until the swelling flows into the limb; and returns to its natural form.
of the limb twisted after the sickness When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is clearly broken, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it does not lose its natural function nonetheless:
do not believe those fools who say that one should break the limb anew, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
and these practices are blamed, and great harms come from them, and by chance death occurs;
nevertheless, if the ligatures and tortures are fresh, they should be soaked in hot water, or herbs that soften should be boiled, such as leaves of mallows, roots, hawthorn, and similar things;
and apply a softening poultice, such as well-made mallow, and take the mucilage of mallows, and mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply the poultice;
or take fat figs and crush them with flaxseed, and similar medications that reduce swelling.
And sometimes the knot is removed to rub continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And let movement be administered to the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is swollen and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut up to the bone, with a subtle incision lightly; and apply compression and careful attention in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs to anyone, it is necessary now to return it without delay.
For if one delays, the area swells, and by chance it may be reset with difficulty to its place;
for it is not advisable to move it when it is swollen: often it causes spasms and other pains;
still, when this happens, make the patient bleed, then leave them alone until the abscesses are resolved;
Then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the treatment will come into its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head down to the feet.
It sometimes happens that the jaw joints are dislocated, and the dislocation of both is according to two methods: when they are slightly out of place and slightly loosened; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the worse side, causing saliva to pour from the mouth which he cannot hold back, nor can he close his mouth, and wraps his tongue around the words.
When the dislocation is small, it returns on its own in many cases.
And if it is complete and perfect, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay;
And in such a manner that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his thumb from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two hands should be withdrawn, to place equally;
and instruct the patient to soften his jawbones and move them in all directions. And the doctor should place it evenly, so that it returns to its place.
And if resetting is difficult, especially if both jawbones are dislocated together, soak them in warm water and oil until they can be reset gently;
do not delay in resetting it, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient clots well to soften, then place moistened cloths in cerate made of rose oil and wax, then bind it gently with soft bandages;
and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be placed between two cushions, so that he does not move to either side, nor tries to move, but take light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaws are bound;
and then let him eat what he wants lightly, and do not work to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well bound and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset perfectly in one hour, and are not returned to their places, it results in recurring fevers and habitual diarrhea, and possibly vomiting of bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is a sign of impending danger; And many times the person who experiences this dies within nine days.
The joint cannot be dislocated from the side within the continuation of the ribs and the hip, and it is sometimes dislocated outward, and this is well felt.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies supine on their back, and extends their arms; and then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then apply the plaster and bandage, and secure it;
and the head that is near the side cannot be dislocated; if it does, and if it dislocates at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
then apply the plaster and bandage, and secure it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
And similarly, the head of the spine is reset when it has come out of its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in no more than three ways:
one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the socket on the inner side; and the second is at the part of the bottom; and occasionally it dislocates at the top part, and this happens rarely;
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inward towards the nerves;
and it often dislocates towards the socket on the inner side, especially for those with little flesh, because the shoulder is more prone to this among them;
For those who have enough flesh, it sticks with difficulty, and reenters with difficulty.
And sometimes it happens to some men that there is a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And dislocation is known when it is towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their difference evident; and you will find a depression at the top of the shoulder, and below the armpit towards the head of the shoulder, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move in any way;
And so, if it is reduced above, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly by palpation;
And this type of dislocation is not to be reduced when it is new, or if the child is ill.
And the method is that the practitioner lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places his fingers under the armpit, and raises the joint forcefully upwards to its place; And the practitioner lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it underneath; it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within several days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the healer uses a softening and soothing preparation, such as a decoction of hellebore and fenugreek and honey-sweetened clover in water, and it should be gentle;
then have the patient lie on their back, and place a pad of equal thickness under the shoulder, not too soft nor too hard, then place the heel of the hand under the patient's armpit, and lift the affected shoulder gently, and pull the patientâ€™s arm;
and another helper should hold the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; the shoulder now returns completely, and if you wish to reset it according to this method:
and it is that you have a man present who is larger than the patient; and let him stand facing the patient's side, and place his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the arm up so that the patient hangs in the air; and another attendant pulls the patient's hand down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, he may hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation returns now.
And it is also reset in another manner:
and it is that you plant a long stick in the ground, which should be as thick as a pestle, neither too large nor too thin; then place it under the patient, but make sure there is cloth underneath, and the patient stands on top of the stick;
Then extend his hand from the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return despite all the things we have said, then do this treatment: take an iron rod that is two palms in length and four fingers wide, with a rounded head to easily enter under the skin, according to this form:
then wrap the head of the rod with a piece of cloth so that it does not hurt the patient, then place it under the skin of the patient;
and extend the arm over the long rod, and secure the shoulder on the rod, and the hand at the head of the rod, then place the arm on a board of suitable width, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: The joint now returns to its place.
And when it is in place, whatever the manner, you must put under the seat a sphere of even linen, then apply an ointment prepared with powdered miller's flour, with incense and egg albumen over the entire shoulder and around it, then stretch the patient gently from under the seat, and wrap the bandage over the ointment, and bind the hand to his neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And he should eat little until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal more quickly;
and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is hard and not softened, it is healthy.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come into it, or for another reason, then you must administer cauterizations with three holes, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and after seven days it still does not hold in place, and he cannot raise his arm, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, is done by impulse, and extension of hands, and another minister is present there;
and treat until he is healed.
And if after recovery the member is stiff and slow in movement, the patient should take many baths until the stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
of the dislocation of the elbow
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated by pins, and returns to place by pins;
and if it is dislocated in all directions, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not hidden, for one can see it well and feel it well; and dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the sick part with the healthy part, then you can see clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and he cannot bend his arm nor touch his shoulder at all.
And it is necessary to reset it as abscesses may occur if not done properly, for if abscesses were to occur, it would be difficult to treat them;
and by chance cannot be completely restored, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance leads to death.
And the restoration is such that when it can be returned to place, you extend their arm with both your hands; and their arms should be spread out, and the hands held by the healer around the side, from below and above, and push the joint with both palms together, or at the base of the palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and strikes from the root of the palm the knife which is dislodged.
And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension;
and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold it steady by two ministers, so that it does not move during extension;
then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped it with a double layer of cloth long and wide;
and when the physician joins the joint to the hand, he anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then forcibly inserts the joint until it returns;
and when it is in place, apply dry plasters with egg yolk on top, and bind it firmly, and tie the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firmly in its place, loosen the ligament, and leave it;
and if you see that the joint does not fit well, restart the plaster and the ligament, and leave it like this for some days, until it is firmly set; then loosen it.
And if it feels stiff after the joint is returned and it does not move, bathe and rub it well, and press until it is alleviated; and place a piece of fat sheepâ€™s wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; and when it sweats, gently rub the joint, then put on the poultice, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times until he is healed;
and if you wish, place moistened flax heated with butter upon it and apply it;
it will return to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the finger joint and its reduction is easy, more so than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to return it to its place quickly, in the same hour that it becomes dislocated, before swelling occurs or an abscess forms.
And the reduction is such that you place the affected hand on a table, and the assistant extends the hand, and the physician places it evenly, so that his palm lies over the appearance of the joint, and presses until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must check if it is in place; then have the patient place the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, have the patient place the back of their hand on a table, and the physician places their hand over that area of the joint.
If it returns now, it is well. If not, then apply soothing plasters to the abscesses and leave it thus without repeating.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after some days, the joint remains misaligned;
and does no harm to the patient except that the hand remains soft, and cannot grasp anything firmly: then you know that the nerves are severed, or the artery;
there is no other remedy except to cauterize near the wound, and perhaps nothing else is worth doing.
And when it is in place, apply the plaster we have mentioned, then press it and leave it for five days, then untie it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the thumb of the hand
Sometimes the thumb of the hand is dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the front.
Then straighten the shoulder, and push the dislocation towards where it needs to go, then support the head of the shoulder, and pull it toward the part where it is dislocated.
and leave it for two days, and then put it back in place that same day;
and bind it as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and move it, and bind it again at night;
and do this frequently, until it is stable, and do the same if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;
and do the same when it is dislocated from another part.
of the dislocation of the backsplice
When the dislocation of the back or neck occurs, and there are many such dislocations, there is no remedy, for death swiftly overtakes the patient.
And the signs are that the patient vomits involuntarily, cannot hold it, and sometimes certain limbs become weakened, such as both legs or both arms or one.
And the fracture often shifts into four parts;
the one that moves backward is called "gilbositez":
the treatment is to check if the gilbositez came from childhood: then there is no cure or healing for it.
And the one that comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment speak in great words, but they are of no great benefit in all cases;
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have fashioned instruments in various manners.
I say that in the swelling that comes to the foot's front part, there is neither remedy nor health;
and also the one that comes directly to two sides, and cannot be treated except by the one who treats it properly for the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient lie stretched on his back in an equal place, and have someone behind him to support him so he does not injure himself;
then place a torch at the head in the ground firmly, and one at the feet, and tie a rope under the buttocks of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
And two ministers hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two torches;
And let them be well secured, the torch as we have said, and the physician place his palms on either side of the spine, until it comes back into alignment.
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board three arms long and place it under the wall, and have the patient lie on their side, then put the end of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board over the spine; and have the physician place his feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly until it comes back into place;
and if you wish, do it with the twist that turns to the hand. And it is that you fix two torches at the head of the patient on one large arm, and near the feet two others, and there should be between each torch, above and below, a palm's space in length;
and in each torch there should be one hole through which the twist runs, and the torches should be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move;
and between each pair of torches there should be one rotating torch, on which the ropes rotate, and there should be two small torches of a palm's length in both rotating ones, to twist the rope;
And then tie the bandage that is between the rollers near the head, and the other bandage near the feet to the other roller, and each of the assistants turns their roller on both sides of the bandage, and the master places the splint evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, apply a desiccative plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the bandages, and then a stick from a tablet three digits long to mark the location of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until he is well.
And if anything comes up at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medications, along with the stick we mentioned previously. And sometimes a piece of bone is administered, and sometimes the appearance comes in the last vertebra of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; And this is the bone that appears, for which one must not have false assumptions: it might accidentally bring about death.
Know that at the joints of the hip and the shoulders only dislocations occur, not like other joints;
and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind;
and deeper within there, and a little dislocated before and behind.
And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is such that when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee appears more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee at all. and the area near which is swollen with an abscess is hot, because the thigh bone extends there.
And the signs of him who is coming to faint are contrary to those before.
And the signs of one who is affected in front are that they stretch their leg according to the extent of the injury; nevertheless, they cannot bend the knee without pain, and if one wants to make them move forward, they cannot go ahead, and they hold their urine, and their ankle swells, and when they walk, they step over the heel.
And the signs of him who is about to be dislocated behind are that he cannot extend his knee or bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the joint is softened, and the head of the thigh is in a position below the ribs.
The remedy for this type of dislocation is that you observe whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, if there is no treatment; and it is not appropriate for it to be treated with presumption.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and this is one of the four types of dislocations, hurry to return the joint, and stretch it inward and outward, and move it side to side; perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is necessary.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or use a strap tied above the knee; And another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he places his hands below the knees, then tightens them with a single swift bandage around the thigh; And another holds the head of the bandage;
and they extend upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
If not, then it is necessary to apply treatment as appropriate.
When the dislocation is inward, you must place the patient on their healthy side, then apply the bandage at the root of the thigh, and below the armpit, then extend the bandage upwards towards the armpit, and towards the shoulder;
Then take another assistant his arms, and embrace the thick part of the diseased thigh, and stretch it out forcefully: it will return to its place now;
and this method of reduction is less severe than the others.
And if you cannot secure it in the manner we have described, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong bandage beneath the two heels and above the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two thumbs' width more than the other;
then suspend him from above his head on a post, and let it be two arms' length off the ground;
Then instruct the minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient, who firmly embraces the thigh, because the joint now returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is out of place, let the patient lie down as we have said for one who has gout, and tightly bind the limb on the affected leg, and do the same on both sides;
then place two torches, one at the head and one at the feet, then insert a torch between the thighs of the patient in the proper position; and let there be placed wet cloths around it so that it does not burn the patient, then extend each minister toward him, and the doctor places his hand equally on the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, place him on the table and press as we have said for gout, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when a dislocation is present, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, as I have said; and place your hand on the affected side, then press with the other hand, and extend it downward toward the knee.
And if the dislocation is behind, it should not be extended downward, nor lifted up from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated to the rear, as we have described for lying on both hips; and let him lie on his back, and the limb should be extended as we said before, and one must press upon the joint toward the table; and it will be proper when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then apply the poultice, and bind it tightly with a bandage so that the thigh does not move; and let him rest for three or four days, then loosen it, and apply the poultice again;
and if you see that they are even, bind them as before, and leave it for three days;
then loosen it, and have him walk gently, until the limb is comfortable.
Of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outward, and behind;
and do not reset it in front.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not hold at the thigh, then you know it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you have the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his chest, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly; and another minister extends his foot so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he holds his calf to his thigh lightly;
and place the plaster on it, and bind the leg to the thigh tightly for three or four days, then unbind it;
and the patient does not work to walk until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not properly aligned, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is healthy
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and feels loose at the part where it is dislocated:
the reduction is light, and it should be extended gently with his hands when he is only slightly awake.
And when it is dislocated immediately, you should seat the patient upright, and have one minister hold his leg out above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice with your left hand, then extend it upwards, and forcefully push the foot upward;
and do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot;
if it returns, that is good;
if not, then restart the work, for it will return;
and if it cannot return in this way, then have the patient lie down on his back on the ground, and firmly fix a lever in the ground between his thighs, and tie ropes around him so that he does not move;
Then the ministers should hold the thigh, and another minister should extend the foot with his hands or to the post, where he binds it at the neck of the foot; Then each minister should extend equally, and the patient should be firmly between the thighs of the ministers to hold the patient when they stretch him;
Then the physician should place the dislocation in his hands equally, and another minister should hold the healthy leg from behind, and the dislocation will quickly return to its proper position.
And when it is properly set, apply the plaster and bandages firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage is not too tight;
then leave it for two days or three, and if the ligaments soften, then hold it;
then unbind it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before thisæœŸé™ï¼Œä»–å°±ä¸ä¼šå†æ¬¡è„±ä½å—ï¼Ÿä¼¼ä¹Žè¿™å¥è¯çš„ç¿»è¯‘ä¸­å‡ºçŽ°äº†ä¸€ä¸ªç†è§£ä¸Šçš„åå·®ï¼Œæ­£ç¡®çš„ç¿»è¯‘åº”è¯¥æ˜¯ï¼š
And if painful abscesses come, you must calm them as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
of the two When both are dislocated, they must be gently extended without strain, and this is an easy task.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back of the foot, then you must have the patient sit on a flat place or on .ie. a straight table, and put your foot over what appears to be the joints, then press strongly with your foot until it returns;
and when it is even and nothing appears, place under the sole of the foot a board with II joints, then press firmly, and leave it for III days, then release; and have him rest until he is healed.
of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies:
Do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and cautious, but rather bold;
and at the beginning of treating hot abscesses, use soothing methods, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope for recovery; and when you see hope for recovery, then reset the limb to its place so that the hot abscesses can come forth;
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing treatments for hot abscesses, and treat the wound as necessary with drying ointments;
And if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones displaced, remove them, and do as we have said in simple diseases;
And guard against entering the path of fear as I have said, for it leads you according to your Creator's will, and for the skill of your arm and body.
