O you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its contents, and I have made the end through its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and entirely foreign, the science has been lost and diminished, and nothing remains of its exterior but small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this came the errors and vanity, and intentions were closed off and science was removed.
It seems to me that I should revive it together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cautery instruments, and of other tools of the work along with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because there is no good master of hands found in our time, the art of medicine is distant. And it is necessary for those who engage in this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the true nature of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations from one another, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and their number, and the movement and resting places of veins, and their origin points.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and especially in the art of practice.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above should beware of falling into error and harming people;
Thus, I have seen many times those who meddle with this art and abandon both their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a mad doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of her neck; whereupon so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; and he took a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to remove it, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound;
And the ignorant doctor presses the splint on the wound with forceful ligatures, and leaves no cloth to cover the wound, and left it thus.
And he commands that it must not be untied;
and left it so that the leg and foot became completely swollen and he came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and untie the leg; and when I had it reset, it was in peace and felt no pain.
But the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed.
And the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was lost.
And I saw another doctor who drained the embedded abscess and then burned it with the malice of his lordship.
For a carbuncle, when it is full of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place where one can remove all that is corrupted.
And for that reason, young man, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two categories: that is to say, work where there is danger in many situations;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be cautious so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your weapons wisely, and approach your patients lightly yet firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised;
and let the terrible diseases of severe illness be left;
and remove your weapons from what you doubt, and act in such a way that you may come from this world to the next in glory.
Galien says in some of his warnings: Do not take seriously an evil illness, or you may be called a mad doctor."]
I have divided this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal hot cauterizations, and the chapter is organized from head to feet;
and about the forms of instruments, and cauterization tools, and all that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and the chapter is organized and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and is organized from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus, as we remember the work, it is necessary for me to tell the quality of the aid and harm of each temperament.
I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest discourse and subtle science and secret responses;
and many wise people spoke about this, and agreed on it;
and they suffocate me with their words, for I fear the length.
I say that cauterization universally aids all temperaments where there is matter, except for two temperaments: that is to say, the hot temperament without matter, and the dry temperament without matter.
In the hot and dry temperament together with matter, some have discussed and said that cauterization is great help there; and others said the opposite: that cauterization is not useful for diseases that come from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat a hot disease with heat, nor for dryness;
And he who says the contrary says that cauterization provides great help for hot and dry diseases that come to the bodies of men. For when you examine the body of the person and their moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it to be true on occasion through experience.
And in any case, let no one interfere except those who have tested it, and who know through long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of human constitutions, and the predispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the outcomes and timing;
we do not fear other constitutions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians gathered together and agreed on the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery together is of the secrets of treatments, and of greater goodness than burning medicine cautery.
For the fire is simple, and does not affect any other limb but the one being treated, and it does no harm to another limb if there is some space.
Pungent medicines travel from one limb to another, spreading and causing illnesses that are difficult to treat in the limbs; and by chance they may kill the patient.
The fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is excess.
And this I have found through experience and the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it is upon the truth of things;
and for this reason I excuse myself for the length of my speech, because it does not please me to take from you the secret that is hidden in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it removes bodily diseases, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; therefore receive them in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, and chose appropriate times.
And I say that the cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmful things coming are removed by the aid of the cautery; And especially if the cauterizations are necessary for pains that cannot wait, so that the limb does not suffer greater harm.
And think nothing of it, dear boy, as foolish doctors do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no recurrence; and they say it thus;
and they say it thus; but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are a medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors which cause the pain, and works faster than other medicines due to its power and the strength of its effect.
And it is possible for the illness to come sometimes according to the patient's constitution and the location and nature of the illness;
and the excesses are gathered within him through the acquisition of food and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered in places where there is an abundance of excess and moisture, such as for toothache pain and similar issues, and such pain does not return; but it rarely happens.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the rear of medicine, and this is true;
but they do not believe that cauterizations are worthwhile after medication, but their understanding is false, and cauterizations are the last resort in medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they do not work, then we administer the cauterization, and it proves effective.
Then it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the foolish doctors' intention.
The ancients said that cauterizations with an instrument of gold are gentler than those of iron, and they said this not only for the quality of the gold but also for the height of its substance;
and they said that the burn from a cauterization does not cause infection, but this is not true because I have tested it and found that it can be so in some people;
and cauterizations with gold are better than those with iron, as they said it is. And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell by its color when it is hot, and it cools down so quickly;
and if one heats it too much; do with fire; and thus there is sufficient obstruction.
I have ordered this chapter from head to foot so that the path may be easier to find.
This cautery is useful for moisture and cold affecting the brain, and there are two types made due to a disease called "soda," and because of various humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and due to an abundance of dreams and tooth pain and throat pain, and especially for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine cleansing the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength and age and habit of the patient can endure; and then do behind the head of the patient.
And then have him sit with his arms between your hands, and place his hands on his thighs;
then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; And there where your two methods will come, if you bleed the joint then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", here is its form: And place on the spot a signet of ink, and do it descending and squeezing your hand bit by bit while turning; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot if you see the bone slightly; and if you do not see it, then repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I told you;
after take a little thread, and put it in wax and soft cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days;
Then place a moist cloth made of butter on it; and leave it on until the heat is gone; then treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmason" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason, healing is aided.
And some say that one should leave the cautery long enough for part of the bone to be burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it shall be treated.
And others say that the cautery should be left on for a certain length of time, and pressed so hard that it abates the bone as wide as the rod that women put in their hair to draw out the humors;
and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after which it should be cleansed and treated.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem entirely good to me, except in certain individuals where there is reason for fear;
and I think that I should leave it aside;
for the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we witness in other limbs;
and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems safer and more suitable to me, then I proceed with it for the sake of healing.
When chronic pain comes to the entire head and lasts for a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills which are called "cochies," and perform purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one performs the cauterization that we mentioned before, it does not work. Take care if the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that area a little as we said above. After cauterize on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we said before, and perform the cauterization at the place called "vasselz"; and there are places where one applies cupping; and place your hand so that you do not see until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cauterization than with others, and I will speak about it later;
and it is necessary that the cauterizations of horns be finer than those used to cauterize the softness of the head, and this is the form:
For the cautery of the head When sudden pain comes to a part of the head, and the illness extends to the eye, and the joint is purged by medicinal remedies, and all other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of illnesses have been performed, yet none of this helps: Then you perform cauterizations according to two methods, namely with dry medication and with fire.
The cauterization with dry medication is done by taking a piece of alum, removing the skin and wrapping it in two pieces of cloth, and then applying it to the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can place the wrapped alum under the skin;
and when it is placed, secure and press it well and leave it like this for twelve hours; and then untie it and treat the area with garlic, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then apply cloth dipped in butter until it becomes saturated.
After the treatment of ointment until it is healed;
and if you wish to use some burning medicines that I have written in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
The cautery of iron is according to this manner. Heat the cautery which has the following form:
And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a dome with a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance;
and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and rotate it slightly, until half the thickness of the heart's flesh is burned;
and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and let abundant blood flow.
After place cotton on silk for three days; then place moistened cotton with butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed;
and if you wish to cauterize this wound with the cautery called "cultellare", do so at the tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this wound which is not old.
of ulcer
When you treat a wound as we have previously said in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and see that the cauteries mentioned before from medicine and iron are ineffective, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white;
and mark thus on the painful area a line half a thumb long, and remove your hand once, to ensure that you do not cut the artery and do not reach the bone;
and beware of the jawbone that moves when eating, and the nerve should be careful not to move so that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting causes great fear and especially for one who knows nothing about it, and who is not learned and experienced; and leave the work in its place;
but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize on top of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
and if you see it necessary, apply the cauterization that we have described in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has two blades; and this cauterization is better than the other and more effective.
of the pain in the ears due to coldness
When pain from coldness comes to the ear, and one has applied remedies such as dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "points," here is its form:
After puncture all around the affected ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a bit above the base of the ear once you have marked the spot; and place ten points around each ear;
after treating the area until it is healed.
of the treatment of the mouth
A condition that must be treated with cauterization is not exempt from those that move due to phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases;
and do not perform cauterization on conditions that come from dryness and nervous spasms.
When you treat this condition of colic that moves due to phlegm from the intestines and purging of the head and gargling, and if it is not effective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and the other a bit outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and apply it directly at the top of the ear just below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as far as one palm; and leave the cautery on until half of the heart area is burned;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is similar to the cautery we have mentioned before, but it is a bit more subtle and the knife should be a bit larger;
After treating the place as I said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is chronic and the treatment does not help as we have said, and the patient does not have a fever, then I make four cauterizations: Two on each of the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the place which is called "vasselz" as we said before, and the last cauterization above the stomach.
and let them be treated as we have said before.
For liddergia (note: "litarg
For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills purifying the brain;
After raising the head of the patient entirely, place the plaster of mustard which is written in the treatise on plasters upon the occiput;
and this is the method of the cautery: do as I have said.
If it is done thus, it is good; and if it is not, perform three cauterizations from the middle of the head descending to the neck, and let there be a space of one thumb's width between each cauterization;
and treat it as you would the others, and if you wish to add more, and the patient is suffering, perform one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two others at the two corners, and he treats until it is healed;
and let the cauterization be what is called "olivare," as I said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hair and of what we said before;
after raising the head of the patient, then perform cauterization in the middle of the head and on each corner, one at the back and three along the neck spine;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then perform four cauterizations along the spine; and let it remain until the most painful part is burned, and lift your hand; after the treatment until it is healed, and apply the cauterization known as "olivare" that we mentioned earlier.
of the epilepsy
Epileptics should not use the cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of worms and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffers from difficult treatment.
And if it is a child who cannot endure this, make them gargle and chew cleansing substances that purify the brain frequently with good meats;
after placing the head in the middle, perform the cauterization according to what we said before, and apply the cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and suffering, perform cauterizations as I have said for those who have paralysis and bodily weakness, on the spine of the back and neck, and apply the olive cauterization according to the method I have described.
If the patient is fasting, perform the subtle cautery according to this manner:
When due to melancholy the excesses or humors are corrupted and phlegm is thick, then apply such cauteries as we have described to one who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the excesses tend towards melancholy and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what is mentioned before in the division.
After raising the head of the patient; after making the bandage of linen well, as round as a circle, place it on the head;
and the patient should sit crossed-legged and be securely held from all sides;
then present the linen strip, which should be made of sheep's wool from an old sheep; and heat it over the fire to a temperature that the patient can tolerate when applied; then empty the circle and place it inside the head, allowing it to cool;
and do this for the patient once every week along with other good treatment until he is healed.
When you wish to cauterize, make multiple small punctures across the entire area to be cauterized.
This method of cautery moistens the brain excessively;
and then place cotton soaked in butter and goose fat on it.
from the pain of the eyes When pain first comes to the eyes as I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying to drink, and protect them from all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath several times on an empty stomach.
After instructing him to lie with his head back, apply the cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauterizations on each temple if the descent of the spirit is to both eyes together, or one if it is to one eye.
and cover the entire cautery with all the veins and arteries that are near the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
and be wary of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with as much force as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in cutting, the caution how you shall stop it;
and sometimes one makes a cauterization to separate the two bones at the heel.
and when you see that it is from cold phlegmatic excesses, then I make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the chapter descending to the eyes: I cauterize in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations at the heel separating the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cauterize carefully above the eyebrow with the small cautery.
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three small drinks. raise his head, and perform the cauterization in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery; and perform two cauterizations of the cautery called "clavilis" above the two eyebrows, a little below the hair;
and be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.
And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the white of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare". of which this is the form:
And if you wish, perform two cauterizations above the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
And do not let go of the hand until one third of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
of the hair that points toward the eye Sometimes the hair of the eyes grows inward and pricks the eye, and one makes cauterizations according to two methods: that is to say, with fire, or with burning medication.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in your care; After marking on the paper around the eyes a shape that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs;
Then place cotton moistened in egg white and parsley juice on the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
After cauterizing around the shape that you marked little by little many times, so that the skin is burned in that place;
and the signs of the work being successful are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs raised at the edge of the eye;
then lift your hand, and leave it like this for III days, then place moistened wool in butter until the inflammation subsides; after the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
And if the hairs come back after that, and the skin is softened, then restart the cautery at the same place, as you did before;
and if the hairs have fallen out, then cauterize until the skin rises to its natural level and is even, so that the hairs no longer irritate the eye.
The hot cauterization treatment is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make a shape from parchment like a myrtle leaf;
then take one part each of French soap and live charcoal, and mix them well together; and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it over the area as you would a myrtle leaf, and place it on the eye paper; and if the illness affects only one eye, then treat that one, and do the same for both if necessary; and place cotton moistened in egg white over the eye;
and have the patient's head on your right side and place his arm over the medication, and press the vessel and cloth every time the patient feels a burning sensation from the medication, for he will feel it as if from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine at its proper time. And when the burning sensation has passed, lift the area of skin, and examine whether you see the paper raised as if it had been lifted by heat from fire or by cutting; And if it is thus, then it is well.
If not, then reapply the medicine to the place where it was applied until your work is even, and your eyes are properly set;
then apply moistened cotton in butter until the burnt area is covered, after which treat the affected area with ointments called "dyafenis" and others until it is healed.
And if it is necessary for you to be very careful in your work so that none of the medicine falls into the eyes.
And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs irritate the eye, then reapply the medicine to that area which is softened by the paper properly, as you did before; then treat it until it is healed;
and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And note that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and according to this, adjust your treatments;
and do not refuse the right path to him who studies this art.
for the treatment of a fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to perform a cautery on it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and have the minister hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor should he shift his head;
then place moistened cotton in vinegar or parsley juice on the eye;
After heating the cautery which is similar:
and place it on the head as if in the shape of a feather quill, so that the cautery is held properly;
if you wish, it should be positioned from one side of the head to the other, and if you prefer, it should resemble a tent;
but nonetheless, this positioning is better for your work.
After pressing the open fistula and drawing out the pus, dry it; and if it is closed, work on it and extract the fluid;
After place the hot cautery, and hold your hand on the cautery above the part of the nose near the eye, so that your hand does not act foolishly; and place the cautery on the fat near the eye, and it corrupts it.
If you proceed to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be well. If not, then begin the cautery again once more, and another time if you need it, and leave it for three days;
after place cotton moistened with butter on it, and apply the cure of a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply a corroding medicine until the bone is exposed; and proceed as the king would in his chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients described. Attend to the fistula, and clean the area; then place in the fissure a subtle preparation of which this is the form: and use an amount equal to one grain of pepper; and hold your hand on the preparation firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the melted pitch does not run into their eye;
and it is necessary to place on the patient's eye a cotton ball moistened with egg white or honey:
the pitch seals the area of the fistula, and it heals wonderfully.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a puncture with a knife, and bring the fistula back into the body of the knife according to what is appropriate in its proper place.
of cracks in the lips Often there are cracks in the lips which are called "hairs," especially on the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
And place it quickly in those cavities until it reaches the top;
after treating the area with plaster until it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the gum or in the uvula, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it becomes putrid and softens and ages and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not improve: then you must use the cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the opening or passage of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches its depth, and at the rear end;
and do this once or twice after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it is healed;
and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the site and remove the corrupted bone, as you will find described in his chapter.
When the gums become softened by moisture and the teeth loosen, and you treat it with medicine but that does not help, then place the head of the patient on your right. after heating the cautery in such a manner that you place a chain on the tooth;
and put quickly into the cautery hot [item], and hold your hand long enough that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth;
then lift your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish;
after have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water, and let them do this for one hour and spit outside.
And in this manner, the tooth that was moving becomes fixed, and the softened gum is restrained, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
of the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold, whether there is actual cold or not, and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then there is need for cautery in two manners: and cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautery with butter is such that you take sheep's fat, and melt it in an iron or brass spoon; Take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent (possibly meaning needle), and soften it in boiled butter, then place it quickly on the painful tooth and keep it there until it is cooled.
And thus do frequently until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish, soften wool and cotton in cold butter, then place it on the aching tooth, and apply hot iron as long as the heat reaches the top of the tooth.
The fire cauterizes are such that you take an iron or bronze cane, and it should be thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth;
After heating the cauterizing tool, as described next, place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cauterizing tool is cooled;
Do this often, for the pain will be removed on that very day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery, and then breathe freely;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And apply the cautery to whichever part you wish, according to your ability;
and this is the form of the cane:
scrofula When scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery as described below in its form, and make two openings for the smoke to escape on the opposite side of the cautery;
and apply the hot cautery once or twice as needed until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it like this for three days; and apply moist wool wrapped in butter until the burning sensation is gone;
after treating the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When the humors overpower the channels of the body, especially when it comes from a cold temperament, then the patient must first be treated with solvent medicines.
After you apply the cautery at the root of the throat, be careful not to reach the throat itself, and do not burn the heart but a little bit.
After you apply the other cautery at the junction of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cautery called "clavile" be as we have described its form before;
and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
When all the diseases of flesh are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the illness is old, then you should apply two cauteries on the forearm in their places; And another cautery between two mammary glands;
And let the cauterization, which is called "clavile," be according to the form that was previously described.
And if you wish, perform cauterization by puncturing the entire area of the cautery called "poins," whose form is described above for the disease of the ears;
And let the punctures be up to thirty, or as needed around the area.
After treating the area as previously described, let the cauterizations be three rows according to this form:
And for those the cauterizations are lighter, because you make three at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After have the patient lie on their back and side; then lift the ear that is inside the tragus with your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has two sides of equal width:
and cauterize the area until it penetrates to the bone, and the shape of the cautery will form four cauterizations;
and for that reason the cautery is made with a cautery that has three sides, so the figures of cauterizations are six cauterizations;
and the nerve is as fine as a thread, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three sides:
And sometimes it is applied to this one nerve, which results in eight cauteries.
After place the porous cautery with salt-pounded powder; After having the patient rest, do not move the affected limb for a long time until it is well healed.
And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cauterization on the thick part of the cauterized area, or many cauterizations by pressing.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach, making it out of its proper balance, and the catarrh is multiplied within him, and common methods of cure are ineffective, then the patient should be laid on his back, extending his legs and arms. From there, apply three cauterizations. First, take one spoonful of pitch and heat it completely for the middle cautery on the clavicle, and two cauterizations on either side until the figure of the cauterizations forms a triangle, with enough space between them so that they do not touch when they discharge pus;
and let the cauterizations be deep enough to reach both sides of the chest, and let the shape of the cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
And if you wish to cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form;
And he who fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and cutting one point on the stomach according to the quantity that you wish of it; then cauterize with the entire cautery which is called "points".
After the treatment of the cure that we had before, until he is healed.
When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and excessive gas, to such an extent that it is forced out of its natural temperament by excesses; and the patient is treated as we have described in the divisions, and it does not benefit them, then the patient must be bled from their temple; and mark three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, away from the hypochondria, where the ribs of a person are;
and there should be a space between each cauterization equal to the thickness of a finger; and let the cauterization be along the length of the body, and do not press too hard with your hand throughout the entire cauterization;
and burn only halfway up the heart, and have the patient stand straight on their feet;
and if he cannot stand, let him lie down, and stretch out his legs, and raise his arms;
And if that is your intention, cauterize these cauterizations on the scapula, but only if you are subtle and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the entire heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and let it not reach the eye, for the skin is very delicate there, and you should be careful to see.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain, but not too strongly;
and if it is in the membrane, the pain is intense.
And when this treatment requires the use of leeches, the patient should be placed on their head;
and then make an incision at the site of the abscess, and then heat the cautery which resembles a reed, as described in this form: And cauterize until the flesh is burned, and it reaches sepsis, until all the tissue is completely charred;
after the treatment according to the treatment of ulcers until it is healed;
and it is not appropriate for anyone except those who have studied medicine extensively to use this cauterization, and whose hands have treated these diseases at times.
Then he may boldly proceed with the work, although it seems to me that it is better to wait.
of the cautery for pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make cautery for pleurisy from the roots of artemisia, and in this manner: take a root of artemisia as long as you can find, and it should be dry, and as thick and as long as your thumb; And the poultice in oil, and apply it to the fire, and cauterize I cauterize between the shoulder blade and neck, and II small cauters a little descending in the part which is below the beard;
And II cauterizes between the fifth and sixth rib, inclining back a little; And I cauterize in the middle of the back, and one above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the sides of the back outer to the cauterization which is between the two shoulders;
And do not press your hand, but rather hold firmly as when smelling.
And some ancient ones said that some men use a fire cauter similar to a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; And the pain subsides, as we have said concerning the abscess of the liver.
But in this work, there is fear of the patient dying now, or a fistula may come which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then they recommended three methods of cauterization that are all good.
In one manner, you should make three cauterizations, or four, in a line along the length of the thigh, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we mentioned earlier;
and do not press your hand on the entire cauterization area, and have the patient lie on their back;
and another method of cauterization is to heat the double-sided cautery as we have shown in the case of shoulder dislocation;
and lift the leg that is on the affected side, where the wound of the patient comes from the left, and let the elevations you use to lift the leg be according to the length of the limb, and the cauterizations be according to the width of the body.
After inserting the two inflamed nerves until the pain is felt on the other side, then draw out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you wish, cauterize the entire cautery with three nerves.
After the treatment when it has expelled pus for a long time, and this is worth more than the others of the previously mentioned treatments.
Cautery is not effective for a person with hydropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the buttocks, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one near the armpit, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the hip. and let the cauteries be close to the place of the pain.
After leaving the cautery open to expel pus for a long time, do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing should be expedited, and both intentions will be together with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the abdomen should be the clamp that we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as it is placed above here;
When the feet are swollen in one who is suffering from dropsy and are filled with yellow fluid, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery as you turn.
And do not enter too deeply, lest you hit the heart, and let the cauterization be in this form:
After make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the kneecap; and let the cauterizations be long, one above the knee in front and the other below the knee, in the middle of the leg;
and leave the cauterizations uncovered for a long time without cleaning, so the pus can drain;
after performing the other treatments that we have mentioned.
When a resolution of the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, such that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by usual methods; And you see the patient suffering greatly and of great strength, so make a large cautery on the stomach as has been described above in the section about the cautery of the stomach, to the circular cautery; And four small cauteries around the mouth, and one small cross-shaped cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each nodule, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
on the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and they are old and consist of cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we said in the divisions, and it does not help, then make cauteries: Three on the spine of the back, those that are farthest out from the hip bone and bone in a triangular pattern, and two below the mouth, one should be made;
And if you think his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling on the face, then place a large cautery over the stomach as was previously mentioned, and another over the liver, and yet another over the spleen for the entire cautery process. And leave the cautery in place for a long time. After treating the area until it is healthy.
When you apply althaea, heat the cautery that appears like a razor, and then place it fully ignited on the applied althaea. And keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the beginning of the vein, where the blood is cut off;
do this once or twice, and if there is much althaea, cauterize each area as we have said; after the treatment of beneficial ointments until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the affected area, it will be more effective.
When the patient cannot endure incision or opening, which we will discuss in its place, if such an illness comes that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When fistula comes to someone and is inflamed, discharging pus and corrupt moisture, then you should immediately apply a fine tent, and be sure to know the depth of the tent at all times.
Heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the extent that the tent has entered, and repeat the cauterization until the diseased and corrupted flesh is burned, once or twice or three times, as needed.
and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby and the large veins.
if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder and to the intestines, be careful around these areas, and do not perform such procedures except in fleshy parts, and remember that it is not safe there.
After treating the wound until it is healed, and if the pus has been drained, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then you can know that the wound is completely healed;
and if the matter has not been removed, know that the wound is still present, and the bone may become corrupted; and thus as one of those we will mention in its place.
When pain from cold comes to the thighs, and due to large flatus, and if it does not respond to female treatment, then you must perform a cautery on both sides of the thighs with the cross-shaped cautery that we mentioned earlier;
and if we perform the cautery in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide more assistance.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and feeble from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the outer part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubic region begin, one on each side, and let each cautery be as long as the width of a finger;
and make one cautery outside the back, or two if you need them;
and let the cauterizations be shaped as described above.
When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for that reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: Then it is necessary that three cauterizations be performed around the mouth, as we have said for the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations on either side of the back;
and let the cauterizations be made with a clamp, as we have said.
When the viscous fluids descend to the hip joint, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and if the place of origin is found nearby, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the area around the joint as it turns, so that the joint lies within the circle;
And let the cauterizations be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, make three large olive oil cauterizations, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all other burns;
and treat it until it is healed.
of the pain in the thigh When pain comes in the thigh joint, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have mentioned in the division, but the treatment does not help, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick humors with foul-smelling pills or other similar good pills. After performing cauterization;
and the method of cauterization is according to two methods: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Fire cauterization is according to many methods, of which one is such:
that you cauterize on the buttock of the thigh three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make them deep and large, and have between each cautere a space the thickness of one finger, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped;
Sometimes a cauterization is made in the middle on top of the thigh head, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the hip dislocation;
but do it in such a way that the circle covers the entire hip, and all the nerves be cauterized.
And this is the way it is done for sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach as far as the thigh or the leg.
And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations where the patient says the pain is, and one cauterization above the ankle four digits to the left side;
and let the cauterizations be shallow, and burn only the thickness of the nerve;
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two digits of the foot or nearby, cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four with the cautery called "points. And if necessary, do more of it;
And if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, do a cautery with the cutellaire or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave it so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who applied a cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and they left it burning so much that the entire leg became swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and the whole foot corrupted. After a belly treatment from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, apply cauterization to both, according to this method.
And the wise ones said about the cautery of the thigh, of which here is the manner, make it such that it is at the head as thick as a date seed, or a little less, and let it be between the joints, and from one joint to the other let there be a space of a barleycorn in length;
and let the crosspieces be on both sides, and let them also be like bolts, and there should be one iron handle well made;
and this is the form:
And heat it until it is completely red and sparks fly, and then place it upon the side of the diseased thigh, and turn it towards the healthy side;
and let the patient undergo one cautery session and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after treating it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we use this cautery little due to fear of his regard, and if we see few who use it;
and still this is one of the good cauteries, which can be tolerated by those who suffer from it.
The cautery of burning medicine is such that you make the instrument with interstices in which descends the margin of the door, and it should be of brass or iron along one side, and at its height have two notches, and between each have the thickness of a finger. and let them be open at both ends and join together according to this form:
After place the box of the thigh on the patient lying on their healthy side, and then place your hand much upon the box of the thigh; After pour it between the two circles of hot water that has been heated over the fire for one hour, and let the patient experience the warmth and burning sensation.
For it causes a bite as from fire;
and when the burning sensation has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip in warm water, and leave it this way for three days, and apply butter until the blackness from the scald is removed; and let him rest for three days so that pus may be discharged;
and this would be the final aid after the treatment of poultices until he is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make the instrument that fits according to what you have done for the thigh similarly;
and this is the method for making it hot, and I have written it in the treatise on the preparation of medicines. Take alkaline substances and quicklime, an equal amount of each, and grind them together, then put them in a new pot. where there is a small opening that allows the tip of a razor to enter;
where there is a small opening that allows the tip of a razor to enter; and place another pot over that one, which is well leaded, and put alkaline substances and charcoal on it, with a layer of powder above, until there are two layers of powder above the prepared powders;
and leave it like this until water and pieces come out of the leaded pot, then take all that liquid and pour it over charcoal and alkaline substances as before.
And then it will be very severe and is treated with various medical practices and cauterizations of other limbs.
For it performs work like fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the thigh well as in the case of decoctions made from honey and anacardium and salt mixed together with soap.
And Galien tells us of a cure where a man was treated for pain in the hip and sciatic nerve, and he praises it highly, and says that no other treatment was done, and he was healed in one session when this cure was performed, and he bathed as he teaches hereafter.
And he says in this manner that you should take green fresh litharge and dry it, and grind it much with a little grease, and apply it to the thigh, leg, or shin where the pain lies, and bind it.
and leave it on for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
And then have him enter the bath until his body is slightly refreshed, and then put him to bed, and the pain will completely go away and he will be healed.
And know that no one must use such medicinal cauterization unless it is after the evacuation of pus.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hair, it helps greatly;
and the cauterization should be performed in such a manner. Take wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow that is between the big toe of the foot and the one called fuscule.
After taking dry goat hair, hold it over fire until it turns to charcoal, and place it on the wool, leaving it there until it is extinguished;
and do it again in the same way, and continue doing so until you believe by sense that it reaches up to the thigh, and the pain is ceased;
and this method of cauterization is called "goat hair cauterization".
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or impact or from excessive bloodletting, or from substances spread out cold, none of these cases is suitable for cauterization except for that which comes from an influx of cold matter.
It is necessary after the patient has been voided of stinking pills or other similar substances, that three lines be marked on the back where the pain resides, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure;
and let the cauterizations be done according to the cautery which is called "points";
and if you wish, make three or four cauterizations at the middle clavicle according to this form:
This illness often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have difficulty raising their arms and are afraid; And you find in the last spine of the back and in its appearance which comes above the other spines.
When you see this and you wish to treat it, cauterize it with the ball cautery according to this form. So that the cautery affects each part of the spine equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with the pointed cautery in two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
After treating the area until it is healed as we have said, and be careful not to apply a cautery to a swelling that is in a nerve cramp.
of the pain of the joints
When joint pain is caused by moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which physicians call "podagra" properly, and when it is due to a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is treated with cautery in such a manner:
Make the moles of cauterization around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need to cauterize the sole of the foot, then make the cauterization as one calls it "point" across the entire area. And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, make cauterizations on each knee III cauterizations or IIII of each part, making all the cauterizations olive-shaped;
And if you need more, do more, but hold back your hand except until the scar on the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make poultices around the wrist for two lines;
and if any pain remains in the two hands, make poultices on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come up to the elbows or up to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient with potent medicines.
For if you give it proper treatment and purge phlegm, then with Gods help he will be well.
When rupture comes in groins, and the balls descend to the thighs and this is newly happened, then it must be that when you wish to treat him, he must eat nothing that day; and that he uses things that loosen the belly so that the feces come out of his belly;
after you make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath until the eye is repositioned, and reset them with your two fingers, and cut from behind the rupture over the bone of the thumb, and make one sign that resembles half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery which has this shape:
until they are white and shed scales. Then reset the eyes to their place; and the minister hold his hand so that they do not move back;
And work well on the patients thighs, and place under him one cushion and one towel on the thighs, and another under the buttocks to hold the hands.
Then place the cautery on the mark with your entire hand, and hold it straight until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone. And be careful that the flesh does not come out when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that the patient does not die because of it, or suffer another harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations for children be delicate according to their measure, and for adults also large according to their measure;
after three days, treat the area of the butter cauterization until the burn is gone;
after that, treat with other ointments until he is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well sealed;
and it is necessary that his nursing be prolonged so that the eyes do not protrude when he tries to go into chambers.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, provide him with a well-made bandage, and have him wear it for another forty days;
and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard against excessive overeating and drinking, and too much loud talking;
and when he follows this teaching, he is completely healed.
And I will say hereafter the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
When ruptures occur in other parts of the body and are known, and you wish that they do not grow larger, apply the cautery according to their size, and let a third part be burned. after the treatment as we have said;
and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at three points according to this form:
but mark the site first and draw a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and proceed step by step throughout the entire cautery.
But the first cauterizations are lighter and gentler.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being injured, and that pain lasts long, and medical treatment is of no use, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "points," and the cauterization should follow the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and its pain.
if he is well from the first cauterization, it is good;
If that happens, restart the other cautery on top of it, because such is custom that they must change to the nearest limb, so you must perform the cauteries until the patient is healed.
The ailments are sometimes cured by cautery with great assistance, and especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you see that it needs to be cauterized, take care if the patient is in the beginning stages, and if it is treated as we have described in the division, and neither desists nor delays, and you fear that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then perform V cauteries on the head: Place one nine inches from the top of the head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two above the two temples, and one behind on the occipital region;
and leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the bone, and until the bark comes out so that the vapors of thick humors can escape;
and cauterize on the mouse according to what is in front of it.
And if the disorder is scattered everywhere; and if it is clearly manifested, then you must cauterize with the cauterizations that we have mentioned at the head, and one cauterization in the neck, and two cauterizations on the nape of the neck, and six cauterizations along the spine, and one large one on the buttocks and another nearby, and two on the shoulders; and two on the ribs, and two on the heels, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are on top of the heel bone so you do not burn them;
and sometimes a cautery is performed on the bone of the little finger, and another on the bone of the breastbone, and another on the liver.
And know that the more cauteries you perform, the more help you give, and it benefits the patient;
and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already completely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you find in the ways of iron.
After treatment, apply flour of wheat with honey to the area and other treatments until it is healed.
When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then you should perform cauterizations on the limb according to its size;
And let the cauterization penetrate a little into the thickness of the heart; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And sometimes cauterization is done to the hand and foot and back, at the nerve that controls the limb, and thus the swelling is removed;
and in any case, do not involve anyone who is not knowledgeable about the limbs and the nerves that move the body.
When the illness called "albaras" is severe, and medicinal remedies are ineffective, then cauterize it with a cautery slightly deep, according to the thickness of the heart, until the pallor is removed, and its color changes.
Then treat with flour of barley and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and sparrow blood and lark blood, of each an equal part; and mix it all together, and wrap it in a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
the treatment of a sore using cauterization
When a sore appears at the beginning and you wish to stop its progress, cauterize it with a cautery that forms a circle around the entire perimeter of the sore.
And always the wise said that one should perform cauterization in the middle of the ulcer;
and always I do not think this is good, for I fear that it may ulcerate and corrupt, and I have seen it happen some times;
and a more proper thing is to cauterize around it, with the cautery called "circulus," as we have said regarding many types of cauterizations.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it delays death either because of the excess it produces or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and there is little blood, or because of the season; and you see it hastening death: then cauterize it with many small cauteries by pricking; after leaving it like this. For she will hasten to kill.
And if you wish to pierce it completely with the cautery, then heat the cautery as follows:
And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and make the cautery such that the patient feels it from outside in such a way that the course of the putrefaction is alleviated.
After the treatment until it is completely healed.
There is another type of disease called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a member consumption, for it consumes the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cauterization with fire together, then heat the cauteries very small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location where the disease is;
After the cautery on all sides until you reach all the corruption, and there remains nothing of it, so that everything that is corrupted be removed.
Then leave it for three days, and place the affected areas that have been cauterized to soak in oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption is gone.
After the treatment with ointments that generate flesh.
And if after three days you see no healthy tissue grow, that is good;
and if it does not, then restart the cautery on what remains unhealed from the corrupted area.
And this treatment has sometimes been cured with medication instead of the fire cautery;
but the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already described the treatment with the medicinal agent in the section: take it when you need it.
pains that come to the feet Many times a disease arises in the feet from outside which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a swollen thing that hinders the foot.
And the cauterizations for this disease are according to two methods. That is to say, fire cauterization, and hot water cauterization.
Fire cautery is such that you heat it until it is as hot as a feather of an eagle, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate like a nail from all sides, and there should be fine edges;
after placing it completely on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it like this for three days until it begins to discharge pus; then apply a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the wound with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
And if they are turned outward from the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery to them; and it is done in the following manner: take a chain of iron or steel, or a feather of vaultul, and place it over the nail and althea leaves, which are used to remove warts; and place the chain so that it surrounds completely, then pour some hot water on it, and hold firmly with your hand, pressing your hand around so that the edge of the chain comes to the base of the nail, and thus allow the hot water to penetrate deeply to the root;
and allow the patient to suffer a little from the bite of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like that, and it will completely uproot itself along with all its roots.
Do one after another until you have treated all those that are on the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
When someone shivers from cold sweat due to nerves, or from a fever of four days, or otherwise, you must perform IV cauterizations on the spine, one cauterization between each vertebra. and one cauterization on the foot, and one above the stomach at the olive cauterization;
this will stop the shivering and hasten the recovery from the cold illness.
At times, baths or foul pus-filled sores appear on the surface of the body, which come from large corrupted matters.
It is necessary at first, when they appear, to make a cauterization on each head of the pustule: a delicate cautery made from the branch of myrtle, whose tip is heated by fire, or from a long root of arisotle (celandine), or a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow anymore from then on, but the excess that causes them is broken up, and they are healed;
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut at the wound coming from the side, or from incising an abscess, or from cauterizing a limb, and similar things; And it is a very grave thing to extinguish.
And whenever this happens to anyone, hurry to place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is stilled beneath your finger, and no more oozes out;
then place the olive cauterizes in the fire, several small and large ones until they are all red;
then take one, either large or small according to the wound and where the artery is exposed, and place the cauterize on that vein where you are pressing with your finger, and hold it there until the blood is stilled.
And if it spurts out when you lift your thumb from the vein, and the cauterizers have gone out, quickly take another of the cauterizers that are in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the bleeding is stopped;
and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
and note that when the vein becomes detached from the artery, one cannot properly reattach it oneself when the artery is large, unless it is done by one of the four methods we have mentioned: by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to reunite blood; and let it be tied and compressed appropriately.
Who will administer a foul smell by tightly wrapping cloths or placing burning things on them, or other similar things, if it does no good even if possible.
And if this happens to someone and there is no physician or medicine present, then he should place his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is reattached over the wound and over the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with very cold water often until the blood is chilled and thickened and stinks.
and apply what is needed of cauterizations and medications to him.
We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which a fire cauterization or hot medication is necessary, and we explained the reasons, causes, instruments, and forms of the cauterizations;
and I have placed that chapter from the head to the feet, and in this chapter, I will follow the same order so that what one wishes to find can be discovered more easily.
And so as I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is greater risk and fear of the cauteries than in the first one, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for treatment. such are those who become so enraged by their illness that they change slightly due to the frenzy caused by their disease, and because of the severity of their suffering; and one must fear these.
And there are those among them who give their senses and say: wait, I am cured"; and the illness is despised.
It is not right for you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place greater honor in your dignity than in your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely concerning what you are certain of, and from which you can gain respect and praise.
and use prognosis and indications in the treatment of your patients where health may be restored;
and this will help you achieve a good reputation, and glory, and praise-worthy memory.
Most dear child, Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to breathe in the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, as it is before the chapter on cauterizations, which I have described from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the head of the child is held too tightly;
and sometimes it comes for reasons that are unknown.
And I have never seen this illness except in children, and in all those whom I have seen it hastened death; and for this reason it seems to me that I should leave such treatments.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled each day until he could not sustain it;
and the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the phlegm, between the heart and the bone;
and the procedure is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should cut a wide incision in the head;
and it should be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows;
and see here the form of the spatula:
If the swelling is larger, and the abscesses are bigger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is out of the bone, and you see the seams of the head open on each part, and the fluid jumps outward when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you: it is necessary for you to cut three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture outside. After cleaning the incisions with cloths and powders, and putting wine and oil on them, leave it like this until the fifth day;
then loosen it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and clean the head evenly, and give the patient dried meat to eat with little moisture until the limb is healed and healthy.
And another way of incising is to look at where the abscess is clearly swollen, and the gathering of the fluid;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut then there where the abscess is clearly visible, and the accumulation of fluid, and make the incision according to your ability;
and be careful not to cut the artery; and if blood flows, so that the patient dies from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
When someone falls ill with a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or worse, and the illness is old, and medical treatment does no good, then the final remedy is cauterization using that which will cut the two arteries.
It is necessary, when you are to cut the veins, that the patient lie with his head back; after which you should rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then have the patient pull his neck against the entire cloth; then look where the vein lies, and their locations are behind the ears, and they are somewhat hidden;
then mark the spots clearly, then cut both veins with a sharp scalpel from two sides, until the vein reaches the bone, and this should be done along the side of the head.
And if you wish, place the spatula beneath the artery and the cloth above, cutting as II should across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood continuously spurts outward forcefully.
And if the artery does not become visible to touch, you should measure a space of three fingers, then mark it clearly and cut down to the bone;
and the amount of blood that should be let out is six unciae, and perhaps a bit more or less, according to what the patient can tolerate, and the fullness of the artery;
then examine the wound: if it remains on the bone joint, cut it so that abscesses do not occur, then clean and bandage the wound, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Of migraine When an old migraine comes with a sharp catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and an ancient frenzied sweat and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical care but nothing helps, then we extract the arteries of the temples and apply cautery as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient should lie behind the hair on their temples, and listen to the artery that appears in the temple, for it beats clearly, and is slightly visible except in some people who are too cold;
and if it is responded to, the patient should press their neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and wash the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible; then take the spatula which has this shape: then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then trace it up to the joints, and carefully separate it from the tissues on each side;
and if the artery is delicate, use the tip of the hook to handle it, then cut it from that part according to the size of two fingers. For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow completely.
And draw blood from six places, up to three;
And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that no corruption comes before the healing of the wound, and to prevent bleeding.
Then cut away the excess that is between the two ties at that same moment, and then, if you wish, apply the fire cauterization with a cautery knife down to the bone until the ends are even.
And this is the principal work, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm constitution. For cauterization is aid to finish off moisture: for it is of greater help with moist conditions.
For it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill the place with old cotton and put on well-made bandages;
and when they are untied, one should be careful with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and bandages until it is healed;
and if the artery is cut as much as you work on it, hurry to cauterize where you fill the place with vitriol and pull it with your hand so that the blood stops; and if you do not have it available, place your thumb on the spot as long as the blood stops, and rinse the area with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and bind it as is appropriate;
There should be a space of about one finger's width between the two knives, and then when you have marked the two places, place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let them be spaced between the two joints because they are not to be joined together by this entire cautery;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And for those who are weaker and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery from two sides, but let the cuts be well spaced to preserve their heat longer. For when the instrument is too cold, it holds less of its heat.
of tears When the tears from the eyes come down from the veins that are above the forehead due to heat, and it does not benefit from any medicinal treatment you apply, and you see the patient's face turn red, and feel the forehead with a shaking motion as if trembling; And when the eyes are swollen and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids are heated and scorched by the heat of tears, then this treatment is necessary. And the ancients called it "contusion treatment," and it is that you make the patient lie down who has this illness, then shave the hair from their forehead, and make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to its length;
And the ancients called it "contusion treatment," and it is that you make the patient lie down who has this illness, then shave the hair from their forehead, and make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to its length; and one of the incisions should be made in the middle two fingers' width above the eyebrows and extend down to the nose, and the other two should be made on either side near the temples, and be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides near the temples;
and move your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of three digits across the joint;
and prepare a piece of sponge and much cloth to wipe the blood, then place the spatula sharp from both sides as shown in this form:
from the incision which is near the temple to the second incision; and peel all the flesh which is between the two cuts to the surface that is on the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatula. Insert into the first groove the instrument called "cultellaire," which is very well suited for cutting on one side, and smooth without cutting on the other side, and this is its shape:
And place the cutting edge towards the flesh on the chest, and the smooth side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle groove.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it reaches the one that opens into the flesh, and then do the same in the middle incision until the other end.
Then draw out the blood evenly, and press the area to expel the remaining blood;
Then place a piece of old cotton in each wound, and cover with cloths soaked in wine, oil, and pitch, and guard against the formation of pus-filled abscesses;
And on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply a large poultice of water parsley, then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until he is healed.
When someone frequently suffers from acute catarrh, and you see the eyes swollen and small, with weakened vision, and the eyelids reddened; and the hair falls out, and on the head it causes pain like fever, and the patient sneezes; then you can understand from these symptoms that those matters and that catarrh do not come from just one vein, and if the treatment affects what is there, this is it.
And it is that you instruct the patient to lie with their back against the wall, then make a large incision across the forehead, and another on the side of the head. And start from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then separate between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton there, and bandage with linen; Then apply cloths soaked in wine and oil above it, and guard against hot abscesses;
When it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with substances that promote growth of flesh.
In such a manner: Take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and apply it to the wounds to promote flesh growth throughout.
of the congestion of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: For seeds, for beasts, for stones from mines, or similar things such as iron; for seed, such as beans, peas; for things that flow out, such as water and saliva and similar things.
When a stone or other substance that does not belong in the ear falls into it and does not grow within the ear, place the ear towards the sun.
If you see the stone, then drip some drops of violet oil or cumin oil, then proceed with its extraction; and make them sneeze with something spicy, and plug their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and cover the ear above.
Much fire comes from this treatment;
and if it does not come with fire, then use subtle pinching to extract it, as follows:
If it comes out with the forceps, that is good;
if not, then extract it with a fine double-pointed instrument;
and if it does not come out with that, then make a linen cord and insert the end of the cord through the hole in the ear firmly, and plug what is around the cord with soft wax so that no air can enter with the cord; then pull it out forcefully, as it often comes out as we have said;
and if it does not come forth in such a manner, take glue as birds use, and place some instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a little cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forth.
And if it does not come forth from all the things we have mentioned, then hurry to cut the ear as for an abscess so that blood may flow and spasms stop;
and the manner of the cut is that you first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein, and draw out blood according to the measure of their strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat where it hangs; and let the incision be like a crescent moon, so that you come to the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it quickly with your mouth;
and continue the treatment until he is well.
And if it is a grain that has entered and causes swelling, then proceed with its removal;
and if it cannot come out, then proceed with the application of a thin poultice according to this form: and administer an incision of that tumor.
But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have done it many times;
then extract it with fine forceps and with suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In the case of water that falls into the ear, the patient should use sneezing to dislodge it initially, and plug the ear with old cotton. And lie down on the side where the water is in the ear. if it falls out because of that, it is good.
if not, take many stones according to the length of your thumb and light, and heat them a little in the fire; and place them in one or a hole of his ear, and have him step on one from the other side, and strike another stone against the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop striking stone against stone until the water flows out completely, and thus it will flow out entirely;
and if you wish, take some reeds, and insert one end into the ear, and burn the other end with fire until the softer part of the reed is burned;
then do the same with other reeds until the water flows out completely, as we have said about the stones.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is a small body, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division;
but if it is large and can be felt, then treat the extraction with tweezers; and it is the lightest thing to remove that can be in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and if the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: if you see any worms, then remove them with fine tweezers, and if none are seen, then take the chain of this form:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And insert the most delicate tip into the ear according to the extent of the patient's pain, then proceed gently along the entire canal; Do this repeatedly until all the wax comes out.
And if they do not come out, plug the canal with cotton as I said for stones;
and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested for killing worms, and you will find them in the section on distillations;
and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this equipment, of which here is the form as you see: And let it be of silver or brass narrow with small holes, and above cover to drip through;
and to press inside the distillation use an instrument of brass well made for this, and if you wish take a scraper and wrap around the tip appropriately with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish into the tube, and the tube should be in the ear;
then press into the scraper on all the cotton, and squeeze your hand gently until the oil is dripping into the ear canal; and the patient should feel it inside, and let the dripping be slightly warmed over fire so that it drips into the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the congestion of the ears
There are some children born who have no hole in their ears;
and this same thing happens to adults due to a blocked wound or flesh inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes occur deeply in the ear, so that one cannot see them;
and sometimes the hole is clearly visible and can be seen well.
That which occurs deep inside and cannot be seen is difficult to treat in many cases, and for the one that can be seen, you should place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the scab clearly, then perform this entire spatulation as described in its form:
And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind all flat, so as not to catch the ear;
if the scab is of flesh from the ear's body, then hold it with fine forceps and gently scrape it away until all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is in the ear, take a fine, light scraper and heat it slightly over fire, then place it in the flesh of the ear.
If you feel the scab where the patient feels pain in the ear, gently pierce it, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear;
then place a dressing in the ear according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do this on some day when the wound is sealed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol ground;
and if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary to draw out the tent and move another tent moistened in cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then treat it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place them on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the treatment of distillations.
This altha that comes in paper from the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tweezers and forceps, and cut a piece from its root with a spatula; then place over the area vitriol ground.
And if it does not respond to being peeled off, then cauterize with a fine lentil-shaped cautery, and after the incision, it will heal.
and often they repair, when something remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the hailstones Many times in the eyes appear things that resemble hail in form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hail," and it is an assembly of thick moisture above and below the eye. The work is such:
The work is such: be wary if the kneecap moves from side to side, and it is easy to know;
make an incision then gently scrape each part, then take it with the forceps, and cut.
if you cannot cut it without piercing slightly the membrane, do not worry about harming the patient;
and if the wound is large, sew it together with stitches, and treat it until it heals;
and if the wound is small, do not apply pressure, for the ointment will heal it quickly and generate flesh.
And if the earwax is inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper over, and extract the wax with forceps, and cut and press from both sides;
and if the paper is distant due to the incision, it does not matter;
and when the wax is removed, wash the ear with salt water, and treat the area with a poultice of flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease that forms on the membranes inside the eyes, and this happens more to children than adults, and it causes great pain in their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the sun's light because tears rush to their eyes;
And for this reason they lie down on their beds immediately, and sleep, and their eyelids are moist with the secretion and appearance covered by the exudate that appears in the eye. And when you press that place with your thumb and feel the exinach between them.
And the method of the work is that the patient places their head on your hand;
and then take a piece of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exudate for each part, then place it on them; and press with your two hands from both sides so that the exudate is gathered within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a narrow incision, and let it not be larger than the wound made when opening a vein;
and they cut the skin deeply until you reach the external part; and in many positions, the external part comes from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract it then in one piece of torn cloth between your two hands, and move your hand right and left until it is spread out;
and be careful not to insert anything into the fissure, do not touch the entire spatumile until the eye, and do not injure it.
And if the external part does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then slightly enlarge the fissure gently until it appears;
Then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths in wine and water, and place them on the site, and extract bandages.
And there are such people who grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then treat him until he is well.
And if it comes to the place of an abscess being hot, treat him with plasters that soothe until he is well.
of the hair of the eyelids When hairs grow in places other than those designated by nature on the eyelids, and they are not removed, they harm the eyes and cause certain ailments such as habitual tears and inflammation of the eyelids and conjunctiva, to the extent that it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes;
and the treatment follows in four ways: either by cautery with fire altogether, or by medication as described in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by cutting and suturing or by cantharides, as I will explain.
It is necessary for you to place the head of the patient on your thigh, then turn the palm of the eye toward your left hand;
if it is converted, that is good; if not, then insert a needle along the entire thread above; and do this near the margin of the palm where the hair grows among these hairs, and draw the thread above across the entire palm, and then turn it to the edge;
then cut in the part below the palm, below the adjacent hairs, across the entire spatium from the large tear duct to the small;
Then pull out the thread, and under the paper place a small tent of cotton and linen, then draw on the paper a pattern, as the leaf of myrtle, and nonetheless it must be according to the quantity that you wish to raise the paper which is designed for all.
And if there is someone who needs to cut a large quantity of the paper according to how the paper has softened;
Then cut through the entire spatumile along the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large window down to the small; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the cautery site, then peel it all off;
Then join the two lips with a seam using one fine needle and a thread of thin wool, wipe away the blood, and trim any excess thread above the two eyebrows with some sticky substance if you wish to do so;
and if you do not wish to do this, then leave the seam and the threads until three or four days;
then treat the wound without stitching with drying and binding materials, because the paper rises suddenly at the moment of the wound and its healing, but the stitch is moved (as the ancients say), and these are works without fear; and there is another method:
and there is another method: And it is that you should cauterize the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, at three inches apart according to the form which is here:
Then cut those which rise above the small parts equally according to the shape which is here:
And if you do not have the ability to hold the tongs, and the objects are not even, then take a needle with a thread, and tie it around the figure; and tie another thread next to the large artery, and the second thread next to the small one, and join them equally between your two fingers;
then lift your hand evenly, and raise all the skin on which you have cauterized, as we have described, then stitch together the two edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed;
And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with plaster and similar soothing ointments;
And sometimes the hair on the skin is turned back:
Then you should use what we have said about incision;
but the suturing in both cases is more artificial.
The treatment for canes follows this form: and it is that you turn the skin and make an incision according to what I have said, and then make two canes by art, and two fine straps as long as the skin and as wide as the spatula is; and cut to II heads of II sides where you hold the threads;
then join one to the other carefully on what protrudes from the eye's membrane, and pull apart the two threads of the two parts firmly; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which is stretched will die, blacken, and pus, until it falls off on its own.
If it delays, cut it with force, then treat it until it is healed;
and when the wound is closed, and the membrane raised, the hairs will no longer prick;
and this is the form of the two threads that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The work is such that you take a fine needle, and put a thin and fine silk thread through it; then join the heads and tie them together carefully, and let the length of the thread be one palm;
then arrange another fine silk thread briefly in the wound, and tie the ends of the thread gently;
then have the patient place his head on your shoulder;
and let it be near the sun so that the work is clearly visible, for this is a delicate and precise task; then insert the needle throughout the wound at the root of the adjacent hair, and pierce through the membrane quickly as you draw it over the natural hair;
Then pluck out the hair up to the root, and insert back that hair if there are one or two or three or more;
Then pull out your hand until the hairs come completely out of the root along with the natural hair.
And if the root is tight and the hairs do not come out with them, then draw the root from behind along the thread you have inserted until the root comes out of the opening above and you can see it with your eye;
then draw out the root and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair grows in its place and flesh grows over;
And if the hairs are short, match one long hair with natural hair, and lift it up along with those you leave, so that it is raised and then take it.
from the pus of the eye When this disease called "aleacrati" or putridity comes to the eye, there are two ways it can occur:
one naturally, and the other unnaturally.
And it happens by sudden wound, or cutting, or cauterizing, and similar things.
And the method of treatment is that you cut open the seam, and separate the lips of it, and put in linen tents, and keep it raised until it heals;
and you must not use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before;
but use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and boil the water of hellebore and flax seeds, and mix the melted cerate with some oil, then wrap a dressing in it, and treat him with this.
And the goal of your treatment is to ensure that it does not heal according to its former shape;
and these treatments we have mentioned are nothing but methods to prevent this illness from returning to its former shape.
This disease which is called "axacrati" in truth, and it is both natural and accidental.
The accident comes from a wound and a cut and a cautery and similar things;
and the method of the work is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left cheekbone to the right, so that the thread comes out in two places on the skin;
then stretch the flesh above completely over the needle, and cover it with a piece of cloth about an inch wide. And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good;
if not, then take a scraper and place it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts inside the paper;
and let the head of the two grooves at the two corners of the incision you have made be in such a way that when they are assembled, the shape should be like the letter called "X" Greek;
then remove the flesh according to the sharpness of its edges from that which is under the paper, then join the two separated parts together with a thread of wool;
then treat with what we have said about softening remedies and tents until he is healed.
And if the illness comes from a wound or suture or cauterization, then you must cut an open incision under the hair of the paper area, and as described above; Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare remedies with all their power as they should restore the figure to its natural form;
and the patient himself, according to what is required of work and instruments in various circumstances.
When this adhesion occurs in some people such that the membrane above is adhered to the white of the eye, and they cannot move or perform their natural actions, then you should insert the tip of a razor below the membrane, and lift it up;
and place the tweezers, such that you cut what is adhered to the thin spatula, which must not be too sharp or too cutting, so that the patient cannot bear for the overly sharp spatula to hurt the eye;
and let your incision, by which you peel off that assembly, be slight, so that the tissue returns according to its natural form;
and when that entire assembly is healed, sometimes they treat the eye with salt water, and lift it with gentle water, and use poultices;
then place between the tissue and the eye a tent of linen, and put on the eye wool moistened abundantly with egg; And after the third day, use a colic belt and solid foods until he is well.
Know that the nail grows in two ways: it is nervous and similar to hard fat, and another which is not nervous, but is like frozen white moisture, such that when one touches it with iron and thinks to cut it with pliers, it cannot be done;
and both of these conditions start near the large tear duct and grow little by little until they cover the entire vision, light, and movement of the eye.
And the method of incising is that the patient should place their head on your lap, then you work on their eyes; and lift the paper with your hand, then curl the nail at the edges of thin leather, and place it above; then take a needle, and put horsehair, or goat hair, or ox hair on it, and strong thread; and double the tip of the needle a little and insert it under the nail, and pierce through with the entire needle, and tie the nail with thread and place it above, and shave all around the side of the nail that contains the plumule and the hair to the top, then cut the remaining part at the root of the nail very finely and with small force, leaving the natural flesh of the nail so that by the incision no skin tears accustomedly;
and sometimes the nail adheres solely to the bone, and with a thread, as we have said; then the skin is stripped off all of the spatumile, which is as follows in form:
And be careful that the spatumile does not touch the tender flesh and tear it, and that the probe is not pierced;
and after the incision, sprinkle a bit of ground sulfur and a preparation made from litharge into the eye, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not loose and you cannot insert the needle, and the probe cannot enter, this condition of the nail is often treated with various medicines;
and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you wish to cut them, let the patient's eye observe, and take a spatula gently and quickly according to this form: And lift the eyelid gently, and if you see it shrink slightly and the reason presses on it, then drop from your mouth into the eye a solution made of litharge and red chalk finely ground, and plug the eye until the next day;
If anything is contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then stop, and treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
then begin the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid harms the eye greatly, then suspend it to the nail, and cut part of it but not all, so that no more tears come forth;
Then sprinkle into the eye a red solution made from litharge.
In some people's eyes, a red substance sometimes appears, covering the pupil and restraining it over the whites, turning it outward, and it looks like a rose petal.
And the procedure is that the patient places their head on your lap, then you work on their eyes, and carefully remove all that red substance with appropriate hooks, and support it with strength;
Then cut the first layer of tissue, and keep cutting with the scalpel until the end, and be careful not to injure the eye during the procedure;
And let the incision be made with a spatula, as we described for cutting nails and removing small pieces, as the form following this chapter demonstrates;
And when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply the juice of boiled rue or pour on red colic water and similar corrosive medicines, and place over it cotton soaked in egg white so that it is secure from hot abscess.
And if anything remains and the blood flows up, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave the medicine and treat the hot abscess with soothing remedies.
Then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do when flesh is applied to the eye in this manner.
However, it is necessary that you lighten the treatment of each weak eye according to the natural way; and from accidental injury, in work with iron;
and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member can endure the work.
Blood vessels are red and are covered over the eye, and their appearance weakens the sight and weakens the eye all day.
Therefore, first you must check if the eye, in which the ulcer is, is protruding, and there is no other disease except for the ulcer; then treat it as follows:
instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, then suspend those veins along the arm according to your knowledge, and let the veins be fine doubled according to this form:
And let two incisions be made step by step on the body according to this form:
then when you treat the veins with force gently, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see the veins move away from the eye;
And be careful not to strike the eye with the points of the spatulae, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very zealous in your work so that you do not miss any veins;
And when you have done this, then apply green and red collyrium to the eye to dissolve what remains of the cataract.
And if you do not have the ability to collect everything at that hour, then apply a poultice to the eye with things that alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is relieved and there is assurance of no hot abscess, then resume according to this manner as described above until he is healthy.
and this is the form of the forces:
The physician calls this type of ulcer "arissati":
when you treat it with cautery and hot medicines as I have said before, and it does not heal, then there is pus that you must incise at the abscess, where it should be opened, and drain all the moisture that is inside, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove it with all the instruments of which this is the form;
and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made of iron for the head to be blunt, and it should be pointed like a file as shown in the present form:
And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is resolved;
and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medications.
if the flesh is sealed and new flesh grows, and the body of the bone is sealed, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew itself and is not inflamed or infected, then you know that it is healed;
if not, then there is another cause to bring the fistula to the navel opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with an instrument and with wet medicines, and when it is uncovered take one forefinger according to this form, and let the tip of the iron be at three angles, and the shaft should be slender until the end as shown here:
Then place it on the bone near the cheekbone, and move your hand away from the eye one inch, then turn the probe completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the wind enters if he holds his hand on his neck;
and then restore the place with dry medications as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the area, remove the material from the neck; it is easier for the patient.
When the eye has become completely open and there is no disturbance or reduction in vision, then you must bind the patient;
then heal it, then apply cups without striking to suck, then place on the eye a bandage made of acacia and aloes and incense and myrrh, and then extract the eye, and the plaster over strips of linen and cloths;
And the method for the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and fold each in four, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes require.
Then strain them over a hard bandage form, and reuse the suction cups to suck without injuring.
Then remove the suction cups and leave the eye held tight day and night, and if the bandages loosen, it is necessary to hold them tightly again.
Then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it is good.
if not; Then restart the poultice and the bandages and the ligature and the cupping until he is well.
from the tearing of a swollen vein When disruption comes to the avascular tissue, it becomes apparent, and force appears from the papers as if it were resin grains, and it is terrifying to see;
then if you see it needs to be cut, the procedure is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part below up to where it is above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the part by the eyebrow; and there you pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position;
then cut the place of the double thread and tie a part of the uvea around it tightly, then remove the needle and put on the eye wool moistened in abundance with egg;
and leave it until the child falls with the grape, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;
and sometimes the wound is restrained by the grape on each side with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
And if the eye shows great appearance, then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes in perfectly from the eye, and draw out the white moisture and lower the eye, and enter it immediately;
then extract until it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but fluid that is gathered in the eye, resembling water descending, and it is not actually water.
And the manner of appearance of the work is that you seat the patient upon a prepared and straight chair, then take his head between your hands on both sides, and move it until you see the brow come up to your eyes; then let it be fixed in place, and do not allow it to descend and let the light be unobstructed, so that the patient can see things as he usually would;
and if it does not descend properly, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the brow is not prepared as we have said.
seat the patient between your hands, then take a fine speculum and cut through the corneal membrane in one spot along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the cornea, until the brow rises;
And when it comes out, drip into the eye hot honey mixed with half mead or boiling water and fenugreek, then treat it further until it is healed.
for the waters of the eye We have described the appearances of the waters in the division, and what is necessary for piercing; and act according to health.
It is necessary that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light to shield from the sun, and hold the healthy eye tightly.
then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eye is left, or on your right hand if the eye is right;
Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right;
Then place the tip of the instrument next to the cornea by the thickness of a hair on that white part of the eye towards the inner corner, then insert the instrument called "almagda" forcefully, and turn your hand until it penetrates the white part of the eye, and feel as the almagda enters the empty space;
and it is necessary that the length of the almagda be exactly equal to the space from the pupil to the end of the black part; and this is the crown of the eye;
you will see the bone through that membrane due to the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument until it reaches where the fluid is, then gently press from one side to another.
If the water flows now, let the patient see before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting for a little while, if the fluid rises again, apply pressure with the instrument, and when it is firmly inserted and the fluid no longer rises, then gently extract it in small rotations.
and then add a little powdered ruby to the fluid, and lift the eye from it. Then place outside the eye plugs made of wool soaked in rose oil and an abundance of egg white, and tie them with a healthy eye.
We, and those of our time, apply it mixed with egg white in abundance.
And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called alberit, here is its form:
And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make a delicate incision, then insert the instrument as we have said.
and at the completion of the work, prepare the patient for the doctor's arrival, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
and let him be free of all movements, and give him light food, and do not move his head neither to the right nor left, and bind him according to his condition until the third day;
then release him in the same dark house and test his vision, and show him some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day;
and it is not proper for you to do this during the time of treatment or immediately after the incision, but it is necessary to postpone this, because the fluid rises quickly.
If an abscess forms, that you should not open the eye before the seventh day, and direct it as he who treats abscesses;
and when it is healed, then open the eye and place a small piece of gold over it for several days, and let it be in a dark room.
And then leave the house gradually, and return to his usual activities;
and know that no student should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from the Irach, who told us that in his country they use small lancets to draw off fluid, but still I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I read about it in ancient books. And by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almonds, so that those who do not recognize them see them;
and they should be properly of silver: And let the front part of them be of the same subtlety, and the rear in three acute angles.
Sometimes the newly born creatures appear in various forms, some of which seem to have many legs like scorpions;
and there are some that have a body enlarged in red color, and below it has flesh of good color. In the case of those creatures that are below and not enlarged, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
In the case of those creatures that are below and not enlarged, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and work his nostrils, and throw the splint to those parts, and draw out the foreign object; then hold it as you can sustain the sharp subtle spatum from one side until you know that the flesh is completely removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be cut, then treat it with all the subtle instruments gently, so that nothing remains. and if it overflows from the abscess, then treat it as is appropriate;
and if these are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize until the blood is congealed and all the flesh is removed, then apply fresh and clean wine or vinegar to the nostrils. If the urine is being passed, and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that he is safe;
and if moisture does not reach as it should, know that there is flesh on the bone above, where the instrument cannot cut:
then you should insert a thick linen thread there, and tie it tightly by hand, with about an inch between each knot; and place the patient's finger with the thread on his tooth as much as possible, and pull it gently until it comes through the tooth into the mouth;
and often children at school do this, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it;
Then hold the end that comes from the neck in one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth in the other hand, and pull them apart while noting us who are in the thread.
Do this until you see that the knots have corrupted the flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before;
Do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrupts all that remains of the flesh;
and then place a bandage of lead on the nose for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medications, use them;
and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, wherein one distills oils and medicines through it:
And whether it be of silver or copper, it resembles an open lamp, like a funnel, and the conduit is likewise;
and if you prefer, make a closed funnel, and the instrument should be full for purging the head;
and it should have a handle at the top to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh upon the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the head of the nose, and it grows and becomes large soon, so much so that it is visible to the eye;
And for this reason, you must cut it at the beginning, remove all hair, then apply the cautery or the burning medicine.
And if you delay cutting it until it is large, be wary if it is hard, of a bad color, and lacking sensation:
do not touch it with iron because it is an embedded abscess, for when you cut it even once, great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of a bad color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then empty the patient of blood without fear, and treat the area with dry and binding substances.
Know that when a solution of continuity comes to one of these cartilage works, there is little benefit, except in some men.
When this happens to anyone, then one must look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips in one seam, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the lips are already separated from both sides, then you must cauterize all parts of their core until they bleed, then join the two lips in one seam and bind them together, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood on top, and grind incense; and place a piece of strong plastrum or another adhesive plastrum on top of the powders, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
The method of sewing is such that you join the edges: using needles, as we have said in the sewing of the abdomen; or using thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
In some people, there occurs an abscess in the lips, hard like grain seeds, smaller and larger;
then you must turn the lips inside out, and cut into each knot, and take it with forceps and remove it from each part;
then apply the area after cutting with powdered vitriol, until the blood is congealed;
and then lift the wound, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
Many times flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus";
you should hold it with forceps, cut it at its root, and let the blood or pus flow;
then apply vitriol powder or other powders that constrict and dry the area;
and if the flesh returns after cutting, which often happens, cut it again and cauterize it: it will not return after the cauterization;
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and unpleasant scales; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and worm-eaten, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the tooth becomes foul-smelling;
it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and place his head in your lap, and remove the teeth or scales that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do you cleanse the blackness and greenness, and the yellowish discoloration and other stains, until they are clean;
and if one removes what is there at the first reason, it is good; if not, then start again from the second day and the third, until you have all raised it;
and know that the teeth require various forms of instruments to raise them, according to what the work shows, because the remover which is used to lift out the teeth has different shapes than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay drawing it out as much as you can, for one must not do this; For it is a substance very high until one has no excuse for bleeding.
Then when the patient is constrained to pull it, you must be certain about which tooth should be pulled. Many times the pain leads the patient to believe it is in a tooth, and he pulls out the good tooth; and the pain never leaves because of that, until the bad one is extracted, for we have already seen this happen with these patients;
and when you are certain of the painful tooth, it is necessary to scrape around the tooth thoroughly; apply strong spatinum all around to protect the gum.
then move it with your two hands or with fine tweezers little by little until it is well loosened, then firmly secure the tweezers; And let the head of the patient's shoulder be between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After extract the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out forcefully, take some of these instruments and gently push on each side, and move it as you did first.
And if the tooth is pierced and damaged, you must fill it with cloth where the hole is; and if you restrain it gently with pliers, so that it does not break when restrained;
and you must carefully work around the gum to extract the tooth.
And be very careful that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and return to the patient due to the mischief of the root greater pain than before.
And be careful that you do not act as the ignorant surgeons do, who in their hurry and boldness sometimes break the bone, and do not achieve what we have described.
but they sometimes cause great illness due to the roots that remain, or because of the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is extracted, wash the area with wine or honey and salt;
and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply ground vitriol to the area;
and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments used to extract teeth first should have long points and thick handles, so they do not slip when you are pulling the tooth;
and these are the forms: And they should have thick parts so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of well-forged iron, and should be toothed to hold the teeth.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the wound, you should place cotton soaked in butter on it for one or two days until the area softens, then use pliers called "algefri," which make the head appear like a bird's beak;
and they should be made inside like a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not wish to come out with these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and place the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say spatula, of which this is the form:
And let it be thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through this, it is good;
if not, then help with all the instruments, of which the forms follow hereafter:
And if one helps with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the form: and other iron tools which are mentioned earlier in the rationale of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pliers, of which this is the form:
And let this instrument be such that it cannot break, and know that many instruments are made of bone; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned;
and the wise masters find their own instrument by themselves according to what their work and the illness shows them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of cases; and if one breaks the flesh or other bones, they should look for the instruments that are needed, which I have told you about, and assist with gestures, of which this is the form:
And let them be large and well-secured to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can grasp and remove it;
And then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, remove it entirely with this instrument:
When a tooth appears not according to its natural form of the body, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you must know if the tooth has grown after another tooth, and it is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or smoothed:
then remove it; and if it is adjacent to the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak, and let it be sharp at the tip made of keen iron:
And cut it a little and a little over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to move the others, and if it appears that you can file it, then file it with such a file as is shown here:
and it is like the edge from which needles are made;
and file the tooth bit by bit over several light days, so that it does not move until it falls out;
then the surface should be smooth for everyone at the end, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, it must be filed down until it is even so that it does not cut the tongue or distort speech.
When the teeth in front loosen due to impact or fall out, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without them falling out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, and that does not help;
They must be restrained with a gold thread, for the silver thread becomes green and rots, but the gold never changes.
and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and tie it double between two healthy teeth, then place the affected teeth between them, whether there is one or more, carefully until you reach another healthy tooth; then continue wrapping until you reach the part where you started, and gently and carefully withdraw your hand so that it does not move;
and let the ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the threads with pliers, and join them, and place them between the healthy tooth so that it does not irritate the tongue;
and then leave it as tight as it can remain, and if it loosens or the thread breaks, tighten it with another thread;
and it will remain like this for its entire time, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth and the two diseased ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, place another in its place, fresh for fresh, as we have said;
And do not intervene unless one is wise and patient, and sometimes it is made in the shape of a bone tooth, and it is placed where the deficiency is, and it is pressed as we have said, and remains and serves thus long.
Sometimes this ligament comes from below the tongue or naturally one is born thus; or by an accident of a closed wound;
and the procedure is such that you work on the patient's mouth, and have their head in your lap, and lift their tongue;
then cut the nervous ligament widely, until the tongue is separated from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knot, which is due to wound closure, then insert the hook and cut this ligament broadly;
and guard that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which lies beneath;
and when you have done so, lift the area with rose water and hawthorn, or cold water, then place beneath it a tent of linen;
and bandage the patient each night so that the area does not seal over.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply powdered vitriol to the area; and if the skin becomes weak, then cauterize it with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat it further until it is healed,
and if you see it as a dark or black or hard color, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is an ulcer;
and if it is inclined towards a boil and there is moisture, pour on the unguent, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and release it from both sides; and if the sweat impedes your work, put on vitriol ground until it is dissolved, then return to your work until you exhaust all effort;
then lift the area gently and carefully, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
abscesses of the throat Sometimes in the throat there are lumps called "godath," and they are properly referred to as the two tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the section, and if they are not healed, be careful:
If this is a hard abscess with little sense and dark color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also to prevent bleeding; but let it be until it becomes black, and then you will open it, as it would rupture on its own;
and if it is of white color and the root is fine, then prepare the instrument to cut, but first check if the abscess is at rest and has subsided.
Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his head in your sight, and work on his mouth and grasp the servant between your hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument, which is how it should be done.
and whether of silver or fine brass like knives:
When you press the tongue against this instrument and see the abscess, take a lancet and insert it into the core, and pull it out above as far as you can;
and draw some material from the cloth with it, then cover it with the instrument, which has the shape of a forceps; and the heads are curved, and one part faces the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of tempered steel or fine iron:
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, cut it with pliers, here is its form: And let it be cutting on one side, and blunt on the other side;
and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot and clear water, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with cold water, or with boiled pomegranate peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanched; then treat him until he is healed;
and sometimes other abscesses may appear in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them as you would the two almonds equally.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that had appeared in her throat, which is known as the small sense abscess;
And I had nearly completely closed the throat, so that the woman could not expire due to the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus for one day or two.
And the abscess was so high up that it had been treated with two plasters through the two openings of the anus.
I hurried then and inserted an arrow into one side, followed by extracting a large portion of pus.
then I did the same on the other nostril, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue;
after inserting the lancet into the abscesses, I drained part of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passage in her throat was cleared, and she now began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to incise the abscess for a long time;
and the abscess regrew quickly, filling up the place that I had emptied, until it became very large;
then I treated it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained without growing;
and I left those areas, and do not know what God did with it after me.
of the eye(socket)
When rheum descends to the eye and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";
and when it becomes large and round, it is called "eye".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does no good, and you see that the hard abscesses are abated, and she is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut her.
and that which is round and assembled and is not long; and if it is bloody or of a dark red color or black, then it is necessary that you avoid making an incision on it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Then, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, regarding its whiteness and length, you should seat the patient before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we made mention earlier; Then insert the lancet into the eye, and draw it out from below, and cut with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for the incision of the two almonds.
And it is necessary that you do not cut beyond the excess that is beyond the natural boundary;
for if you cut more, it will harm the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient fears the cutting, it is necessary that you use caution in the cautery of the fearful sensation.
And the method of the cautery is sharp heat. And it is that the patient place his head in your lap, and then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and rinse with hot water, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and in using the construction of this instrument, which is here the form:
And let there be at the head a spoon where one puts the medicine, like the spout of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine onto the eye;
and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus from their mouth flow into the medicine inside, so it does not go down to the throat, and do this;
then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it has taken effect and the twitching from the medicine has subsided;
and if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medication, and place the instrument along with all the cotton into the channel above, until the cotton adheres to the eye;
do this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and after four days or five.
And if you need to restart the cauterization with the medication, then restart it, and after the cauterization, wipe around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what is around with the medication;
and let it be rinsed with cold water, and gargle as needed until it is healthy.
This cure is more effective than incision, or the cautery;
if it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamint and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and artemisia and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and add oil, and let it boil;
and the pot should be well sealed with thick clay, and inside the pot there should be an instrument shaped in this manner: And it should be made of silver or bronze, and one end of the tube should be placed in the patient's mouth as the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is deadened;
After you start again often, until the swelling subsides, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the hot onset of the abscess, for many things can happen; and do not do this when the abscess is hot and declining.
And if this instrument is not present, take a chain and place inside the head a piece of eggshell, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to burden the mouth, and this is a good treatment altogether safe.
Many times it happens that a bone or spine of fish, or some other thing, gets stuck in the throat;
Therefore, it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you may see the movement of the thing;
and what you do not clearly perceive and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food be cooked in the stomach; by chance, the harmful thing may be expelled through vomiting;
when the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel cloth, or lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches its place, let it settle, and then pull hard;
and if it does not come out as we have said, then take the instrument of probe according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest you cause suffocation, nor push the bone inside;
and instruct the patient to insert the instrument, so that he moves when it reaches its place; If the boil bursts, draw it out fully so that all the instrument is equally within, until it is completely out.
of the blood from the throat
Sometimes the blood is treated, as I said in the division, by the care of medicines; and when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient by the light of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook or fine forceps.
And if that does not suffice, take a hooked cane and insert it into the patient's throat, then place a hot iron at the hook of the cane, and do this frequently. And if the patient is to be bled throughout the day.
then take a full glass of cold water, work it in the mouth, and pour it down so that it is swallowed, and move it with your hand frequently; and as soon as the blood tastes the water, it falls.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, with the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye;
Do this repeatedly, for it will fall without delay.
And the method of the fumigation is that you take a pot with live coals, and cover it with a perforated cover, and in that hole place the head of the instrument;
then pour in your fumigation, and the patient should place the end of the tube in their mouth, and close it tightly so that no smoke escapes but goes directly to the vein;
and the blood will now flow out, and if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation multiple times;
allow the patient to feel thirsty, and let them eat dirty and salty foods, and do not let them drink water;
and then it will be necessary for her to expel the fire by this regimen.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the blood flow is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved pliers for entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and there is a texture like that of a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot let go;
There are many types of abscesses, according to what the memory recalls later from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size;
and it is in two ways, one of which is in its own likeness, and from those that hold moisture.
And the second way is for the places where they are on the body.
for abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses of the flesh area are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And there are abscesses that one must not pierce until the swelling is dead according to its completion;
and there are such as must be pierced when they are hard, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints.
For when abscesses come near joints, and one lets it remain until it is rotten around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, thus causing contraction in that limb.
When the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal member;
where it is near the fundament, if one pierces it thus that it may die;
and it is not appropriate to pierce an abscess that has not been fully digested, except for one near the fundament, so that it does not rot and become inflamed internally, and a fistula does not form; and cannot be healed in a long period.
And you must know the time for perforating an abscess that has died according to its completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of fever, and the reduction in pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
And it is necessary that you make the incision where the abscess depends most and where it appears most clearly;
And let the incision be long on the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, at joints and nerves and arteries, and equally anywhere where there is no pleurisy. In cases of bleeding, according to that member.
And when an abscess is in the flesh, it is better to wait until it is confirmed to be completely digested before proceeding with puncture, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before then, the venom of the abscess will spread through the body, and it will be full of much corruption; and by chance the lips and depth of it become hardened.
And for some abscesses that need to be punctured according to the width of the body, depending on what the limb requires.
And you should treat small abscesses with small incisions; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to pierce the skin and cover them; when they have become as stiff as cloths and are swollen, it is necessary to treat them as one would boils:
and there are some that are split into three angles, and there are others where one covers them as one would with myrtle leaves, like arm abscesses;
and there are some where one makes a round incision, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Those who have an abscess without a head, such as a superficial one, you must pierce it thoroughly;
and when the abscess is large, and it has collected much blood, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the blood at that time, but only part of it; then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more afterward; do this gradually over many times, until all the blood has been released;
especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or elderly and infirm. For the pus sometimes gushes out with the exit of the pus, which might by chance kill the patient, and you would not be blamed for it.
Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have punctured the abscess, clean the wound, and examine whether the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a large wound, then apply linen or old cotton dressings; and if it is large abscesses, and there are many openings, then you must insert a dressing into each one so that they come together;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have sewn it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or dry linen shreds without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
Then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold and moist remedies, and wet a cloth, placing it on the bleeding area repeatedly.
And if the bleeding continues, administer governance and care, and use the powders that I have mentioned earlier in this book, and if it is winter time, and the place where the abscess is located is very cold, then you must put up tents and cloths soaked in wine and hot oil;
and if it is in summer, and the area is fleshy, then you must place cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for three days, as we have said;
and then open the abscess and dry it and treat it as is appropriate until it is healed.
And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses:
For I have told you how one must proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
For small abscesses of the head come in various forms that are covered, like the shell of a hen's egg, and there are many similar cases.
There are some that are fatty and of such a type where there is moisture as well as pus;
and there are some that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt if the artery does not oppose it.
And the work of the loin is such that you should test all the instrument called "entromissoire," the form of which comes next, and what it contains.
For if there is moisture, then he splits it from above along the length.
And when the moisture is drained, carefully scrape away without leaving anything the skin that contained the moisture, for it returns quickly if anything is left.
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and in salt, and immerse the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who remain overnight should bathe in it.
And then start with the cotton again as before on the second day, and the third, until you know for certain that it does not remain overnight;
then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess persists in the fatty tissue, cut it according to this form, lengthwise; and apply your ointments, and scrape it from all sides, and focus entirely on draining it from the cavity where it lies;
And if the artery opposes you, do as I told you afterwards.
And do the same for an abscess if it is stony, cutting and scraping as I have told you.
And when you incise a stony abscess and the moisture, it is easier, for they contain little blood. And if there are any abscesses on the head where there is no moisture, and among these were the abscesses that I treated on the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if one had touched it, it would have caused a wound as if struck by a stone.
In other abscesses that come on the head, especially those that occur at the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the incision should always be made in the most dependent area to allow pus to drain.
and treat them as is appropriate.
This kind of abscess often appears on the neck, and sometimes behind the ears, and also elsewhere on the body, and they are very painful, growing one next to another.
And each scrofula is properly within its own area, such as the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities among these scrofulas.
and there are many similarities among these scrofulas. There are such as contain moisture, and there are others that do not wish to obey health.
in the one that you see has good disposition when touched, and it resembles the color of the skin, and is soft on all sides and does not adhere to the neck veins or arteries or conduct, and is not deep;
you should cut it open from above, and peel each part of the skin, and extend the two sides of the wound with forceps if necessary, as we have said about abscesses of the head;
And draw it out bit by bit, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let the spatula not be sharp nor cutting, for the hand will slip, and do not go too far, so as not to cut what should not be cut.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work on it, put in the wound vitriol ground up, or some powders that constrict blood, and press down on the wound; and leave it until the abscess is abated, and the wound softened, and begins to pus.
And when the bleeding is staunched, return to your work until you complete it;
Then inquire with your proper index if there remain any small scrofulous nodes, and cut them out and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then it is not right that you should cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it fall away without harm;
Then fill the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
And if you cut out the whole boil, then it is necessary to bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, since there is no excess tissue due to the size of the boil. It is necessary for you to focus on cutting the root of it, extracting the pus, and sewing as we have said.
It is necessary for you to focus on cutting the root of it, extracting the pus, and sewing as we have said. Those scrofulas that contain excess fluid, pierce them where it is most apparent;
and pierce them as was said before, allowing it to drain, then administer lint with ointment and similar things, so that it purges what remains of the corruption; And when the wound is well cleansed, then apply a healing ointment that promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the treatment of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who practiced it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have scrofula, it is necessary that the groove in the throat called "epiglottis" be exposed; and one should not provide assistance through these, because all the veins and the flesh of the patient are affected in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both tonsils.
When the illness is in the windpipe of the flesh, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger of suffocation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should make a small incision across it between three and four circles, or rather between two circles according to the size of the incision on the surface, not in the cartilage;
and those places are suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from there.
And if the master is fearful, he should extend the skin of the neck for the whole inch, then cut through until he reaches the windpipe; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the surface as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the blood vessel of the neck that jumps forth in the place where it is broken, and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open for a piece.
And when the hour has passed during which strangulation is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew it all up without the cartilage;
then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim states that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and death approaches. Then cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
and for this reason, the elders commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease passes, and it passes in three days or four; then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was treated.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young lady took a knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe.
and I was called to treat her, and I found her as if dead.
I examined the wound and found the blood that had come out, and I knew that she had not cut any veins or nerves in her throat, and the flesh was issuing forth from the wound.
I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated it until she was healed;
And it happened to the lady that she became red-faced, and returned afterwards to her condition.
For this reason do I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess in the shape of a bean, and it occurs very often in women;
and it follows two manners: natural, and accidental;
in the natural case, there is no foreign body.
And the accidental case follows two manners, one of which is similar to fat like ours, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from us of an artery; And there is fear in it, and one must not work with fierce force except on the small one, and prove and search throughout the entire interstice: if you find it as thick as our fat, and it cannot be in any vein, cut it like one cuts the nose, and draw it out completely, if there is any. and search carefully at once, and treat it as is appropriate, until it is perfectly healed.
There are many ways to deal with noses, of which I will describe all the similarities;
and now it is necessary for me to explain all the differences between our treatment and other methods.
I say that sweat and fever come, until the boiling is past, and the pus is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With the poultice there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains flour, which is its own kind of poultice and matches the color of the skin, and it begins like a blister, and becomes large;
and they are of two kinds, either fatty or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
It is necessary when you come to the treatment of the nose that you first examine and inquire about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to their form which will come in the chapter that follows.
And the method of examining abscesses is that you take the moistest part that you find in the abscess, and press with your two fingers, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core, as befits the size of the abscess;
Then extract the interosseous bone, and take care not to damage it.
If moisture runs across the skin, regardless of its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
and if moisture does not come after the interosseous bone, know that it is fatty, then cut it in a cross shape, and take it with forceps, and gently scrape each side and be careful of the coat where it lies so you can draw it out healthy with your hand;
and if you cannot draw it out whole, then remove it piece by piece so nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the pain will return many times;
and if it remains for a short while, and the blood does not distress you, then apply the wound with some corrosive powder, and hold the wound steady, and place warm poultices on the abscess, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed;
and if the flesh is abundant, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and treat it with what promotes tissue growth.
and if bleeding opposes you or something else does, then hasten and apply the place with powdered vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound becomes rotten, and replace it with a decoction of blood. then return to cauterize what remains of the flesh.
See here the forms of the instruments used for insertion, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small;
and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, for enclosing abscesses of fistulas;
and they are also like the needles used to stitch sorcerers, and are made of brass or copper, or iron, or silver, and yellow ones are more valuable, and those stained black are better for enclosing the bends of fistulas;
and there are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The forms of tumors are of many appearances, as you see here:
and there are tumors that have two curves in three ways as well;
and there are tumors that have three curves, and they are also of three kinds;
and there are tumors that have two curves, and tumors with only one curve, and they are also of three kinds;
And all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these for which one performs is sharp, and there are some that only cut from one side, so as not to damage the nerves, for that reason one does not cut the vein or the nerve.
and of these intermissive ones are the allemandes placed in sleeves, so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses;
and there are three types: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and one uses them only in fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas;
And sometimes another instrument is made small, resembling the husks of figs, in this form, with which one staunches blood: and it is sometimes placed at the site where veins are cut open, and arteries, and sometimes follow this large form:
Sometimes the testicles of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts;
and remain deformed and swollen, and if one wishes to treat them, it is necessary to pierce according to this form from this line b to g: then scrape off the fat, and apply healing medicine to the wound that promotes flesh growth, then bring together the two edges of the wound to heal it, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the testicle drops down and is enlarged as it often happens with women, then cut it into two parts above through two similar incisions; so that one is held to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line two until the line G; then peel the skin that is between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not yet fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to excessive bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in a caustic ointment; and leave it until it has absorbed the remaining blood and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
These abscesses that appear under the buttocks are hard forms of scrofula with sides, and there are some that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to the line .g.: And when all the pus in the abscess is emptied out, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment as needed until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles a scrofula, cut it as we have said about incisions for scrofulas, and if the wound discharges pus, treat it with cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is sealed, there often result abscesses; and likewise happens to a swollen vein and abscess;
and one recognizes this when it is due to the artery, as the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your hands, you sense the tightness;
and when it is due to the vein, it appears more superficially;
and it is foolish to incise this abscess, especially when it is located away from the axillae and angles and on the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and for him who has it at the head, one must also avoid it, and in the case of arterial swelling, make an incision above the skin.
then work the area with scissors, and carefully separate the artery from the surrounding tissue, until it is exposed;
then insert a needle on one side and pierce it to the other side, and tie off the artery with a doubled thread in two places, as I have taught you in extracting the two arteries that are in the temples;
then puncture the area between the two ligatures with an instrument so that the blood flows out which is there, and release the abscess;
Then administer the treatment that induces vomit, until the patient relieves. Then treat them with appropriate ointment until they are healed.
And if the abscess is near a vein, you should mark with your hand the area of the abscess on the skin, then insert the needle under the spot you are holding, and pierce it, and place double thread there so that you can draw it from the other side. Then ligature the abscess as I told you, using one part of the thread around each of the two threads.
And if you fear that the thread might come loose, insert another needle along the entire length of the first incision through the abscess, and tie the threads in four places.
Then incise the abscess until the excess matter comes out, then incise the excess matter from the heart and leave what is bound;
Then place a damp cloth on it with wine and oil, then treat it with bandages and ointments until he is well.
Just as abscesses occur in the artery and vein, abscesses also affect the nerves when they are injured, or from excessive labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows and in all places where there are joints, and these are severe abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the skin, and it is painful in various conditions.
and when it is pressed hard, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the flesh deeply, but near the heart;
And it moves well on all sides, neither forward nor backward, nor sideways nor upwards, and the one who is in joints should not be cut with iron: by chance there would be contraction; and for the one who is in the head or forehead, cut the skin with a spatula.
and for the one who is in the head or forehead, cut the skin with a spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, suspend it with an ounce of material, and peel it, then remove it and stitch the wound together, and treat it until it heals.
Sometimes it occurs in bellies and not elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its resemblance to such things, and the root is subtle, and the mass is large;
and there are both small and very large ones;
and I saw a man who had two of them in his belly which were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, and had fine roots, and were slightly split, and moisture corroded them quickly.
I removed them and found one weighing eighteen ounces, and the other six. The procedure for incising is such that you check if the patient is moist, and the color of the tissue is white and moist with a fine root; cut it with a spatula wide, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
cut it with a spatula wide, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence. For in cutting there often come too great flows of blood, and if the blood overwhelms you, then hasten to use the cautery;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made linen thread, and tie it around the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not stop restraining the linen thread until it fits the joint properly, and work with it carefully;
and if the roots are thick, be careful when cutting to avoid injuring the abdomen, but you may cut half of it, then cautery it so that it does not regrow;
Then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon which is of pink color and poor sensation and milk-white appearance.
For this is an embedded abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer shortly.
when the swelling is strong If the appearance of swelling comes from a cautery on a wound or tear on the surface, and it is on the belly and some of the bowels are involved, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before mentioned, or from windiness;
and if this is due to the rupture of the surface and the exit of the bowels, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the skin, and it causes little pain, and is clear from various exits. And if it is due to an issue from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on both sides, it responds and then returns, and perhaps it is constricted, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and for hard labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue, and becomes clear when you press it with your hand, without any restriction;
And if it is due to blood, then these signs clearly indicate large and hard abscesses, and they are fixed according to a certain quantity; And if it is due to windiness, then it is shallow to touch, and the treatment is that you observe whether the appearance is due to arterial blood, or from a vein, or windiness.
And if it is due to windiness, then it is shallow to touch, and the treatment is that you observe whether the appearance is due to arterial blood, or from a vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear about it, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bile, then you must instruct the patient to hold their breath, and lie completely straight, then incise all around the wound; then instruct the patient to lie still between your hands, then go around the place you marked with the spatula, then extend half of the abscess above with the large forceps; Then bind the area tightly with a strong thread or a rope of thick silk, and ensure that the bandage is firmly in place;
Then work on half of the abscess extended over the bandage, and place your index finger inside to seek the intestine; if you find it caught in the bandage, then loosen it, and push the intestine back into the abdomen;
and if you find the bowel, grasp it with your hook and cut away the excess;
and if the artery or vein obstructs you, proceed carefully around them, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two strands of thread outside what you have done in a cross shape to ensure puncturing;
Then incise the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the wound to pus until it necroses, and the dead tissue falls out on its own. When you cut it when it is subtle and pus-filled, then treat it as needed, and drain the abscess as we have said.
When you cut it when it is subtle and pus-filled, then treat it as needed, and drain the abscess as we have said. And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and close the wound.
of the ulcer We have discussed in the section the similarities of ulcers, and how one should treat them with medicine, and how to avoid treatment with iron.
And we say the ulcer spreads to the marrow, and great care is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when ulcers are in places where they can be scraped out such as an ulcer on a breast or thigh, and in similar places, it should all be removed at the beginning.
nor has anyone ever been healed before me.
And in the places where it can be removed, as we have said, it is that you should sometimes purge the patient of black bile;
Then make it bleed if there is obvious fullness, then position the patient properly to perform the work;
Then apply your poultices to the ulcer, and remove hair from all parts, and remove tissue from all parts leaving nothing behind;
and let the blood flow completely, and mark well the place with your hand or some object, and if the outflow of blood is contrary to the incision of an artery or vein, then cauterize until the bleeding stops; then treat it further until it is healed.
of hydropsy We have already described in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the accumulation of fluid is formed, and the signs of each condition, and the treatment done with medicine, and that which is treated with iron:
and one should not touch with iron in these two similar cases: that is to say, tympany and ileus, for it is a fatal thing;
then when you treat this case of dropsy which is called "swelling" with medicines, and the cure does not help, look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as colds and loose bowels and similar things; do not use iron in this case, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient is of strong temperament, and he has no other disease but dropsy only, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should act thus: Lay the patient straight on your hands, and have the minister press the belly by inserting water into the lowest part of the abdomen, then take the spatula according to this form: And let there be cutting from two sides. point it, and ensure that it does not enter so deeply as to reach the intestine when inserted, and cannot be withdrawn;
then check if the edema is located towards the intestines: if necessary, you should cut above the navel three fingers wide on each side of the belly; and if the edema is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel three fingers wide;
and if it is for the midsection, let it be to the right, and it must not be that the patient lies over the crease so that the excesses do not flow to the weaker area;
then pierce the skin with the instrument, and cut it, and lift your hand to scrape off all the suppurative material between the skin and the tissue as you would in flaying, about the thickness of a nail or slightly more;
then puncture the tissue until the pus comes to an open place, which is where the fluid will drain, then draw it out with force, and use this instrument whose form is as follows: And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and it is made of light iron or reed, and has small holes in one part; and when there is a cost (rib) on one side, three perforations; and two on the other side, and one on another;
and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers make on a quill:
at the top is the blade, so that when the instrument comes to the tip, it now descends along the instrument;
empty then half or one-third of it, for if you empty more than is necessary at that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he falls fainting, or he approaches death;
but according to the emptiness according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the conditions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse;
then draw the instrument and retain the fluid, and it is now retained for the heart which stops up the passage that is above the diaphragm, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
then restart the instrument on the other day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw off a small quantity of fluid;
do this on some days, and be careful not to overdo it so that no more than a little bit of fluid remains.
And if you are uncertain about the patient, leave them much in water, and treat with the cure of the grave or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and dye from drinking; and treat with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
Sometimes children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
It is necessary to pierce it immediately throughout the spatumile very finely according to this form:
then put a fine plug of lint in the opening, and tie it securely for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, let him urinate, and then replace it;
and perhaps it is not necessary, for the urine that comes from above does not leave it closed.
He whose opening is small, if treated with the cloth of flax as we have said, will be enlarged.
Those who do not have the urethral opening in its proper place are afflicted, for some are born with it at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis upwards. and they cannot urinate because the matter cannot reach the bladder, and this is a serious illness.
And the method is that the patient lies supine on their back, then stretches the head of the penis and holds it as thick as a quill, so that the urethral opening points straight ahead, as it should.
and be cautious of bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding as one would for any bleed, and treat the wound until it is healed.
pustules of the shaft Often this swelling comes in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh;
and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones;
you should take them out with a fine needle, and cut and clean all of them, then put on moistened cotton with Egyptian ointment; then cure it with Diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the wound is malignant, of a foul color and putrid, then you must apply cauterization to it.
When you have cut it, and if the swelling is in the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the part that is inside first; And when it is sealed, then treat it to avoid.
For when you treat it together, the head of the penis is not assured that it will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come to the penis and the testicles;
It is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of pomegranate peel and vinegar, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then treat with a lunar cauterization according to this form:
The cauterization helps with both conditions together: that is to say, in the discharge of blood, and in corruption;
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to insert a silver tube into the urethra, and the patient should urinate through it;
And when the hairs are raised at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, and it becomes an injury or an abscess, then you must burn it with a sharp instrument until the band is loosened, and release the head of the penis from all sides;
And if it is difficult to discuss this matter, then you must burn with the cautery slightly at the head of the penis and on the skin;
Then carefully separate them, and place a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water on it so that it does not raise again.
Circumcision is not like the separation of other wounds; Though we perform this work of our will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, as they did not practice it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the majority of masters and seniors who performed circumcisions around the age of one year, and for those with strong constitutions, and for all newborns;
It is dangerous because there are two layers, and by chance one cuts through the upper layer and leaves the lower; Now there is the need to cut again, and the pain is doubled, and for the purification which is at one year old, the tip of the member is not assured;
and in the purification of the nail, by chance the iron slips, and ruins the work, and many times they are born such that they do not need purification, and I have seen it.
From the healing that is done with threads throughout the entire limb, I have discovered the goodness of the experiment, for the threads cut precisely both above and below.
For when you press your hand, cut evenly in one continuous motion; but the thread should be tightly wrapped around the skin;
and the method of the first procedure is such that you should make the child, if he understands, believe that you are only tying the thread around his member and then you can amuse him in any way you can;
then hold him straight between your hands, and place the instruments between your hands or behind your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
then place your hand on the member and blow at its root, and pull it up until the head of the member is engaged; Then clean well of the dirt that is assembled there, then bind the place with a double thread, then bind from one pit to another ligature;
Then clean well of the dirt that is assembled there, then bind the place with a double thread, then bind from one pit to another ligature; and hold it with two fingers by the second binding at the pouch and at the right index, and cut between the two ligatures, then lift the heart quickly and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow drop by drop, for this is the safer method; and put powder on and above the powder place a piece of cloth glued with one yolk of cooked egg diluted with rose water, prepared with good and fresh oil of roses, and leave it there until the next day, and treat it again as needed until it is healed.
The form of the forces for purification is thus:
the two heads should be sharp and should be as large as the shaft equally:
the mistake in purification is when the pus inside goes to the incision;
then you must extend it to your fingernail, just as the pus forms an abscess;
and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it to your fingernail, then hold it with forceps, and then cut it.
And if they transgress for three days, and that which is below the thigh swells, then leave it until the abscess is sufficiently healed, and lightly scrape it;
Move the part as much as you can, and avoid the shaft of the penis, so that it is not harmed.
Treat the wound with powders that we have discussed in the chapter on powders, and if you cut into the heart too deeply, and it goes beyond what is necessary, it will do no harm;
treat it as we have said until it is healed.
from the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of stones, or clotted blood, or bile, or dead tissue, or similar things, as we have said in the section;
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone that is in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and place the feet on the back, and extend the stomach from above the back, and have the patient pull in their abdomen as much as they can; and then the necks of the bladder are constrained to express the stone above, so that the urine is loosened and;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", of which here is the form:
and let it be of fine silver, thin and drawn out, like the feather of a bird; and let the tube be one palm in length and a half, and let it be fine at the tip.
And the method of urine evacuation is such that you take a doubled thread, tie one end to a piece of wool or cotton, and put the other end of the thread into the urethra;
and trim the excess wool and push it up to the end of the thread, then grease the urethra with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and massage the bladder and penis with warm olive oil and vinegar;
Then gently insert the syringe into the vein until it reaches the root of the vein, then fold the vein above toward the bulb;
Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and feel the patients sensation come up to the empty space, but this is not done according to this order unless the path it follows is twisted;
Then stretch the thread through all the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow;
and continue with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient feels relieved.
When pus or blood comes to the bladder, and putrefaction is gathered there, and you wish to introduce liquids and medicines, use all the instruments which are called "clepsydre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and has three openings: II from one side, and I from the other, as you see;
and the hair of the place where the medicine is applied should be such that it closes off the opening well so that one cannot draw out moisture, and insert when necessary;
and when you wish to apply your medicines to the bladder, place the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw it out with the extractor that is inside;
you will draw out the moisture with the catheter, and then firmly press the extractor inside; the moisture will enter inside, and it will now reach the bladder, so that the patient can feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one administers to the bladder:
It is made of silver or reed, and the tip is higher;
and direct it toward the side where the ligament falls;
then take a sheep's bladder and put in the liquid with which you wish to administer the enema, then tie it between the two sides securely with a strong double thread, and heat the pot of that liquid over the fire;
then insert the tip of the enema into the penis, then squeeze your hand along the bladder to push all the liquid gradually until the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder;
And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle out of it, and pierce it roundly around; then thread a strong wire through these holes, then join the circle as one joins a sieve, and place within it what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and attach it to the instrument;
and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already mentioned in the section the methods of stones and their extraction along with medicines;
and I have said the difference between the stone formed in the kidneys, and all the signs, and which stones one should operate to remove; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the urine skips from the bladder, similar to acute conditions in its subtlety;
and he clearly sees urine, and the patient scratches his penis, and does so many times, and then becomes dizzy; and in many of these cases, the foundations are weak;
and the healing of children is easy until they are four years old, and it is very difficult in the elderly, and for adults it is moderate, for those who are between young adulthood and old age;
And the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to clean the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders in seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and raise him up and move towards his back, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it sometimes comes out from a higher place;
then have him sit between your hands which are prepared, and his hands should be behind his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward;
then press and feel inside;
if you feel the stone in its place, then hurry now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall to the touch of everything, moisten your middle finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is female, or your thumb, if the patient is a fully grown male; and insert it into its fundament, and search for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, draw it to the bladder neck;
then press with your finger, and remove the stone where you wish to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to spread his right hand over the genitals upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the genitals in the area where the incision will be made;
Then place the spatula over it, which is its form: And make an incision between the genitals and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel;
and it should be straight over the stone, and your two hands should immediately be at the anus, and the incision should be wide enough on the outside, and inside narrow according to the size of the stone, not too large;
by chance the pressure may cause your hand at the anus to jump outward without effort;
and know that there may be stones with corners and edges: It is painful to exit;
and it is like one who is swollen, similar to a flower bud, and round, with a slight opening.
For those who have corners and edges, make the size larger;
and if it does not jump out, then you must clamp with pliers that are like a file at the top to firmly hold the stone so that it does not escape; where you insert from the side a delicate curved instrument at the top;
and if you cannot manage it this way, then enlarge the opening slightly, and if blood flows out, clamp it with vitriol;
And if there is more than one stone, place the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then draw it out forcefully, and the smaller ones after if there are several.
And if it is very large, you must wait and make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes immediately preventing the wound from closing;
but still, strive to extract it, or use pliers to remove it piece by piece;
and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, then place a damp cloth over it in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; Then place the patient on their neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you dislocate it, thoroughly wash the area well with oil and water, then treat it with diafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
And if abscesses and infections come into the wound and blood coagulates in the bladder, causing retention of urine, which is known to occur in such a manner that it clots along with the urine: Insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause harm.
Then clean the wound with water and herbs and bind it, and assist in all ways you know until he is healed;
and it is necessary that every time you treat him, you bind both thighs, and apply the medications to the affected area.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra passage, stuck inside, and the urine cannot exit; if he treats it as I say, you should cut it multiple times, and he is excused from the cutting due to this treatment. I have already tested this in this way.
Take an iron fork according to this form and let it have three prongs fixed in one handle:
then take some thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
then insert the probe gently into the penis until it reaches the stone; and rotate the probe with your hand against the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from another direction;
Soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what is obstructed by the stone that is inside the penis. It is broken immediately, and the stone comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do this for some reason that prevents it, tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then cut the penis directly over the stone between the two threads, then extract the stone out, and untie the thread, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
of the female stone
It rarely happens that a stone forms in women, but if it does occur once, the treatment is difficult and is prevented for three reasons:
One is that by chance the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows herself well enough to expose herself to men, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman who knows well in this art of midwifery;
and the fourth manner is that the stone in the woman's body is harder and deeper than the man's stone, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if necessity demands this, then you must find an experienced midwife, but one such as this is hard to come by, and if you cannot find one, seek a discreet and chaste midwife;
and present a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the inquiry into the stone; and carefully observe whether the woman is a virgin:
and carefully observe whether the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the fundament and search for the stone;
and if she finds it, she should press the stone down with her finger, and recommend that she inserts her finger into the patient's vagina, and searches and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder.
If she finds it, she must gently move the stone from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh;
Then cut around the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the groin, where it is moved, and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move his hand above the stone or below it, and let the incision be small at first;
and do not move his hand above the stone or below it, and let the incision be small at first; then insert the probe into the incision, if you feel the stone enlarge the wound as much as the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with edges.
and know the signs to understand the outcome.
And if the blood flows, then place vitriol powder at the site, and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops;
Then return to your work until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about for extracting stones from people to help in your work;
and if the blood thins and it is from the artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the area and bandage with cloths and linen, and do not attempt this again, and leave the stone unextracted, for the patient may die by chance; Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work, until the stone has been expelled.
Ramus aqueous is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white matter, which comes from the kidneys and is contained in the egg;
And it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly on the skin of the eye, so one thinks that it is another eye; and it is the skin of the pupil between the white syfac that we mentioned;
and this does not happen unless there is pus. And the generation of this aqueous retention is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and the matter spreads there.
And sometimes it comes from striking the pupils, and this moisture has many colors: where it is a color declining to yellow, or without redness, or black, or clear white, and this happens more frequently;
and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white syfac that we mentioned, then the abscesses are round, the pus long like the figure of an eye, and does not affect the pupil, because there is moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the proper tissue, then the abscess appears with part of the eye, and because of this, people think it is another eye;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white membrane, then one can feel it well;
then when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test it thoroughly in all directions, as the form has been described above. According to what comes after the intromissory part, judge what is within.
And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be bathed according to his strength and the fullness of his body;
then lay him on his back on something slightly elevated, and place many cloths under him;
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs below the heart.
Then take the scalpel and cut through the skin between the testicles down to near the root, and make your incision perfectly straight until you reach the white fat layer, and peel it back gently as much as possible;
Then puncture the fluid-filled area with a wide incision, and drain all the fluid, and then use your forceps to stretch the opening upwards;
and do not touch the heart of the testicles, but only the fluid-filled area; Cut through all or piece by piece carefully considering him subtly, for if you do not cut wisely, the fever will return.
And if the eye jumps during your work, then reset it to its place once you have completed the task of suturing.
Then sew the two halves of the torn foreskin together at one seam, then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the eye corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary to ligature the vessels that are suspensory, fearing the loss of blood.
Then cut the foreskin along the suspensory part, and extract the eye, and treat it as we have said.
And if heat is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put wool soaked in rose oil into the wound;
if you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put wool soaked in rose oil into the wound; and place another piece of wool soaked in wine and oil, and put over the two wounds, and cover with doubled cloths, and bind it securely according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and wrap them with linen strips according to this appearance and join them by sewing at the groin of the trousers, one from the thigh up to the buttocks, and the other to the side part;
and place the two heads on the two rings, and let all the ligature be secured in the loop of the bracelet;
and sometimes this condition is treated with a cautery instead of iron, and you should take a fine knife-shaped cautery, cut the skin between the toes, and heat it as we have said, so that the white substance containing the fluid is exposed;
take the cautery in this shape, and pierce that fluid with hooks, and scrape it with this fine hot cautery:
And cut in all the ways you can, until you remove everything;
and be careful that the fire does not touch the eye;
and know that this work is more safe; and move them to prevent bleeding, and proceed with the work of cutting;
and if anything goes against you, such as an abscess or bleeding or another thing, then treat what is contrary to you according to what was said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this work because of its horror, then administer perforation as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have said that aqueous pus is there, make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess on the inner part across the entire span of the body, and place the puncture along the length of the body;
and let the aperture be wide so that all the fluid can flow out;
then place cotton on the site, and bind it, and leave it so that the remaining fluid can drain, then treat it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not allow the fluid to exit at the wound site, then you should insert a quill or instrument used for treating the fluid in hydrops, as described above;
and enlarge the pocket of the wound, and check that the fluid returns, and it will clot after six months or thereabouts, and when it has clotted as before, then the patient will spend their days in this state.
Know that during the cutting of this vein, fear occurs in many conditions, so it seems to me that it is better to leave it as it is;
and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses occur in the body, especially in the groin; and this happens for many reasons.
This is due to excessive acidity and coldness spread in the groin, or from impact;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin; and finds no pain, and there is a severe abscess;
and by chance, some severe abscesses are frightful and stony, and of a dusky color, and sometimes they come from the body's arteries, or swelling of veins.
When it is from the arteries, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it is not proper for you to touch it.
One who is afflicted by the swelling of veins is known by its disposition through the feeling of finger pressure, and one can properly assess the condition based on this sensation, as well as on other parts of the body; And it is that you cut the cord of the testicles, then place the egg above, and draw it out from the white membrane, and release the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
If the testicle is already hardened with these new membranes, then it is necessary that you draw out the testicle, and cut it.
And if it is swollen in the membrane, or inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all of this area, and cut it completely.
And if the birth of the flesh is at the back, then you must cut it all away, and extract the eye, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, apply the wound with wet wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it further as needed until it heals.
This is an abscess wrapped in a covering similar to leather, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient moves very painfully when he goes.
And the treatment for this illness is also as dangerous as the one before, and nevertheless we will tell you about it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on a raised chair, then place the suspensory from below to your hands, covering all the vessels close to the penis, and grasp them firmly, and stretch them forcefully;
then cut through the large oblong spatula with a sharp edge across the vessels until they are exposed, and then skin each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then insert a needle with doubled thread and tie it at the first place where the vein is, and tie it again to the other end; Then cut them directly in the middle, along the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted humors;
Then treat the wound as you would others where you apply poultices, so that no vessel bleeds that nourishes one of the testicles;
for by this no harm comes, and if the veins are full throughout, it is necessary to draw blood from all the veins; so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of veins, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
The occurrence of this condition is due to the incision that comes from the suprapubic region, or the extension on the abdomen in the area of the inguinal canal, which causes the intestines to descend through that opening into one of the testicles;
and this rupture is in the thigh or from extending it, and these two manners come from many causes:
by impact, jumping, bending, lifting heavy loads, and similar things;
and the signs when it is from extending the thigh are that they come little by little over a long period and do not happen suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the bottom because the thigh presses against the intestines.
And the signs when it is from the section of the cheekbone are that they cause sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, near the skin, because of the exit of the intestines and the body part moving away from the cheekbone.
And sometimes the intestines descend with the hernia, and are trapped inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are compressed.
And in these iron treatments there is fear, for which one must avoid them.
And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to push the intestines back in with their hand into the wound if they can reach it; Then bind around his neck, and lift the thighs;
then extend the heart above it, and shave all the skin of the genitals completely; then insert hooks into the flanks according to what you need to open the wound, and make them such that the eye can easily exit;
then peel off the skin that is away from the genital skin until the white fatty tissue is exposed on all sides;
then insert your middle finger into the area behind the genitals, between the white fatty tissue that is under the skin of the penis, and between the second layer of fat, and separate what is behind the penis, and between the second layer of fat;
and then move to the right hand inside the groin, and stretch the white surface up with your left hand, and lift the egg over all the surface towards the waist; and instruct the attendant to lift the egg up and loosen those who are tied behind the binding;
and ask your two assistants if there is any part of the intestine wrapped around the white surface tightly, and if you find anything, push it back into the abdomen;
then take a needle with a thick thread made of several strands and push it into the rear part of the surface, which is behind the skin of the groin; after the waist, then cut the head of the ribs that appear from the children, until there are IV children; then arrange them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and bind it with a strong cord from two sides; then wrap the head of the ribs that appear from the children and bind them firmly from two sides so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter, preventing an abscess from forming; and place the cord again according to the first binding long by two palms from that point, and after these two bindings leave the skin underneath the scrotum large by one palm; and then all around according to the curvature that the eye carries;
then cut in the part that is away from the skin of the scrotum, until the blood flows, and the bowel, as we have said before;
then apply moistened wool in oil to the wounds, and wrap them with the linen we have mentioned. And sometimes the white vein that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood loss. For this happens often, and leave the bandage on until it falls off by itself;
and if it delays in falling off, soak it in warm water, and apply what we have mentioned, until it falls off;
then treat the wound with another method, until it is completely healed.
of flesh hernia
In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like thorns that are alongside the vein, in such a way that you tie the vessels, above the waist lightly towards the back;
then cut into it and treat the abscess of whoever is operating, until the vessel discharges;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and it is evident;
and no part of the intestines descends into the scrotum, and if it does descend, it is serious, and requires repair at all times;
and if it remains too long at this stage, the wound or sore will grow worse, until the intestines are affected;
and this happens due to the extension of the sore which is in the angles, as we have said, because it becomes extended, then softened and swollen and open;
and the treatment for this is with cauterization, as we have said before;
and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and have the patient lie supine on their back between your hands, then probe the swollen area of the wound to a width of three digits;
and then extract the tissue which is below the skin as follows, then take the thread and place it on the visible part of the tissue;
and press it firmly against the belly, then stitch the two visible parts of the tissue at the top of the thread, and stitch one and the other;
then extract the head of the thread, and do not cut any tissue or stretch the egg or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal hernia; then treat it according to the treatment of wounds.
then treat it according to the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, bandage and treat the wound until it is healed.
The tissue is tight, and there is no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is stiff in this place, and closer to healing.
for the softening of the skin of the genitals
Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men because the tissues inside become softened, and it appears milky.
And it is necessary when one wishes to treat it, that the patient lie down on his back, and the leather which is softened be placed upon the natural skin;
then join the two edges at one seam, and if you wish, sew the excess of the softened leather to three seams or four firmly;
then cover between the seams, and treat it as other wounds until it is healed, and remove the stitches.
of the discipline
Know that castration is condemned in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book;
and it is necessary only for two reasons:
Therefore, one is that the physician knows how to answer when asked, and knows the treatment;
and the other, because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
I say then that castration is performed according to two methods: either by attraction, or by cutting.
In the method we perform by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hanging. then grasp them with your hand until they retract and you no longer feel them.
Of the treatment of the spine: You should castrate the animal, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then attach the suspensory bandage, and cut around each one at once, after you have properly flayed them;
and leave some of the fat on the surface and the fine fat that is on the vessels;
and this method of castration is gentler than the one done by traction, because with traction some part of the testicles might remain accidentally, causing the animal to desire lust;
then treat the wound until it is healed.
On hermaphrodites
Hermpheidry is according to two manners in men: one of which is that between the two thighs it opens as much as the figure of a woman's body would, where there is hair, and sometimes encircles the urine.
And the other method is for women, and it should be applied to the wrist like a rod and two fingers.
And the treatment of the man and the woman is that you cut the adjacent tissues all around, and treat them as other wounds;
in the second manner, for men whose urine sprays out from the skin of the thighs, there is no treatment.
Tentigene is a tissue attached to the genital area, so that it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the condition to be treated.
It is necessary to soak the excess of the tension with your hand or fingers, and then cover lightly;
and do not go too deep, so that no blood seeps out, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed;
and for another flesh that appears at the mouth of the throat, and when you touch it, it may break apart, and it resembles a quill, and because of this, the ancients called it "quill disease". It is necessary that you treat it as we have said regarding tendon treatment, and care for it until it is healed.
It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has occurred;
and it is natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has occurred; whether it is by flesh attached, or of thin or thick skin, and is made deep in the flesh, or ribs, or inside, or wherever;
and prevent conception, and childbirth, and perhaps menstruation from occurring;
and the knowledge of these things is by observation of the bile.
If the obstruction is close and apparent, then treat it with your fingers or with a catheter.
If it is of thin skin, and it is close to the ribs, then hurry, and cut in this manner:
place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs;
then spread the two ribs apart, so that the thin skin is cut, and it is over the swelling;
Then take wool, and melt it in oil, and apply it to the site, and have the woman lie on her back each day so that she cannot stand.
And if the sialagogue is hard and thick, then you should scrape it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
If the obstruction is due to flesh, suspend it at the olecranon and cut it away;
and have the blood-stanching medicines ready, such as vinegar, dragon's blood, incense, and egg whites;
then apply a bandage of flax wide enough that the wound cannot close;
and keep it open for a long time, and dress it with a tent of dry linen;
Then proceed with other treatments until he is healthy.
And when flesh is dead in a wound, it must be cut according to this method, except for deeply seated abscesses. For in the deeply seated abscess that is in the wound, one should not attempt to cut it open.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without proper treatment become hard.
and I have already mentioned in the section the similarities of them, and the signs, and here I will say those that are curable.
I say that hemorrhoids and hard lumps, when they are perfectly formed in the wound, and do not appear to the touch, should not be treated with a cautery.
Those who have the mouth of the ulcer, which can be felt, are those whom one can cure.
It is necessary then that you place the woman in a cold room, then pull out the tumor with pliers, and cut it at its roots, then apply powder of medicines that constrict bleeding, such as oak bark and dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things;
then place her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water;
And if bleeding occurs, make the patient sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and make one plaster on their back.
And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, apply cupping to the back and breasts without injuring them;
then take wool, and soak it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply to the area.
And when the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it is healed;
and what is called "albathir" is red and resembles a sharp head, so it must be cut as I have said about the thelul; and then treat him until he is healthy.
Many types of abscesses occur in the flesh, such as canker sores and stone abscesses and herpes and ulcers and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, it is necessary for me to discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the thigh, which is not among those that affect the bowels;
and if you wish to know the work of iron, observe whether the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and turns red if you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but allow it to come to a head until the pain subsides;
and then have the patient sit on a chair, and place two small stools for him to lean against, support his back, and position his legs so that they are bent at the knee;
and let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good rope;
then place the patient on his right side and bring the instrument used to work inside the mouth of the wound, which is described below;
and it is necessary that when you bring this instrument near, you insert the tip first to determine the depth of the wound so that what enters does not go too deep and does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not harm it;
And it is necessary for him to place the tip of the instrument above, and to hold the instrument.
And when the abscess is apparent, and it is incised by hand gently, then it must be opened at the top, at the spatumile site;
and when the boil is emptied, it is necessary to place in the wound moistened cloths in rose oil, or in green oil;
and place the cloth outside the wound in the middle of the dressing, and place on the outside over the dressing and over the joint clean cloths moistened with water or in which mallows have been boiled;
then treat after two days of ointment application as needed, until it is healed;
And sometimes one raises the swelling and the wound with a enema of water and honey, and then with water in which long roots of lilies and artemisia have been boiled; then return to applying ointment.
And if the wound is laid open in the morsel, then you must avoid treating it with iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
Of childbirth It is necessary first for the midwife to know the appearance of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman strain downward, and desire to smell the air:
then the child hastens to come out; then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural form, and the exit is under its head, and the afterbirth with it;
And when you see these signs, gently press his abdomen so that the baby comes out quickly;
for when it descends with its head, the afterbirth comes out with it, and is purified of its excesses through proper care;
and those who come in another manner do not come naturally.
For it sometimes comes upside down, with its feet first, and may come out in an abnormal position through the thighs or hands, or emerge from the abdomen or buttocks, and turn around by chance on its neck, or in other bad positions;
it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the positions how one should assist them.
If the child comes out naturally over its head, and the woman gives birth heavily, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a stool, or where women hold her;
and prepare her nature with oil or fenugreek boiled, and then place between her two thighs the small spatula whose form is here: and cut the membrane, and trim it to its nail so that the moisture inside flows out;
and press the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give her an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil;
then have her take and sneeze from conditi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: Now remove the child.
And if both hands come out of joint, you should reset them gently bit by bit; and if they cannot be reset, place the patient on a chair and lift their feet up; then raise the chair off the ground, and support the patient so she does not fall when standing;
and if the hand cannot be reset and the child dies, cut the hands with a knife that is placed here beforehand, and extract the child, then reset it properly.
of delivering the child onto its feet When the child stands up, it is necessary to lift them up high; and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
then take one of the feet and extend it little by little.
When it jumps to the thighs, instruct them to grasp it, and make it sneeze from this position. and may it jump out if God wills it.
And if it does not go further as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is according to its natural position. For then it moves easily.
And if it does not come out as we wish, take mastic from the altars, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and pound all in one mortar; and place the preparation inside and apply this ointment, then have her sit in warm water up to below the ribs;
and when it is softened, apply the collar of myrrh to it, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on the chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her abdomen, for the child now jumps.
of the birth of the child upon its knees When the fetus comes in this form, place your hands on its head little by little; then let her be seated on her neck, and hang her feet down, and lie her down on the bed; and fold her hands little by little, and then press her hands on her abdomen, and remove the cushions from under her until she is prepared to go down; and if the child does not jump, then take his feet and move them apart, then push up his belly, then put your hands under. and lift the child little by little; and instruct the woman to hold on as tightly as possible when the child emerges.
of the birth of the child who emerges with one hand hanging down It is necessary for the surgeon to return the hand: if it cannot be returned, then help the woman stand and walk;
if she cannot walk, then have her lie down on the bed and spread her legs apart;
then massage as I have described;
and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then study to return the hand; and place the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to grasp as the baby comes out.
from the exit of the child onto her neck, and let her spread out her hands, and her face turned towards her mother's back It is necessary that the dislocated joint hold their hand, then turn it little by little, and move it gently;
and when it is even, put on the natural muscle movement of height and oil, as we have said, then command her to move little by little;
and when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and command her to grasp; And make them sneeze. In the same manner for the entire second part
In the same manner for the entire second part When the swelling reaches this point on the entire second joint, cut into the second joint to your nail, until the moisture is emptied;
and if the child can move up its face and neck, cut from the mouth so that it is not held back, and move the child;
then push the child inside until it is positioned as needed, and instruct the woman to hold onto something;
on the outcome of twins Know that children often come in pairs, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and often happens. These are strange things, and do not live, if they ever occur;
These are strange things, and do not live, if they ever occur; I know that they are multiplied and are separated by the upper part that divides them, which is attached to the cheek;
and sometimes they come out as naturally as any other part, as we have said.
And if they come out forcefully, treat them as we have said, and let the hand be subtle, and do quickly and gently what needs to be done; and do so as it is needed for salvation. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or even up to XV, and they are all shaped like children by the measurement of the wise sage, and it is necessary that the bailiff seize everything, for perhaps a similar thing befalls them; do as is appropriate according to them.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman of the dead child in the womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; you must know if the woman is in good health and has no accidents that would cause her fear of death;
It is necessary that the woman lie on her back, and let her shoulders be inclined downward, and raise her legs;
and the attendant should divide her into two parts, laying her on the bed in such a way that she is not positioned for the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth with warm oil mixed with a decoction of horehound and fenugreek seeds, and also smear her hands with these oils and decoctions;
then gently press on the woman's abdomen, then find the appropriate spot where pressing is effective, and watch to see if the child is prepared to descend headfirst;
Place the cautery iron in his eyes or neck or mouth or palate or behind the beard or in the throat or near the sides, and if the descent is on the feet, place it on the toes and at the middle ribs;
and it is necessary that he hold the cautery iron in his right hand, and place the curved part between the two fingers of his left hand, and press it gently with his whole hand, and apply the iron to one of the places we have mentioned until it reaches the empty space;
then apply another cautery iron opposite the first one, or a third if needed, so that the extractions are equal;
and then stretch it evenly by moving from side to side, so that the bones can exit, and let the edges of the bone be toothed to hold the bones in place, as shown here is the form:
And if one part remains, anoint the side with some of his oils, and press it into that part, and pull the other part;
and if any part remains, place this bone higher up, and do so until it all comes out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back for grasping, then you must wrap around the finger, until it all comes out; Then place it at the joint of the sole or heel, and thus you should do with the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the head of an infant is large and it is tight in the birth canal, or there is a swollen assembly on the head, then you should insert two fingers between them, cut the head open, and extract the fluid; where you should round it with the instrument called "almidach," of which the form comes with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one;
and do the same if the child has a large head naturally;
and then pull the bones with pliers, and if the head jumps forward and it is tight against the forceps, cut them until the moisture that is in the foot's exit is reached;
and if it cannot come out, cut it piece by piece until you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or between the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture flows out.
And if the child is on his feet, then the traction is light, and the adjustment to the mouth of the socket is light.
And if it is tight in the belly or breast, you must stretch it with a drapery wrapped around your hand; and cut into the belly or breast until the moisture that is inside flows out;
and if the other limb is removed and the head remains, push your hand in through a hole at the base, and draw it out to the mouth of the socket; Then insert the needle at one or two places, and draw it through.
and if the mouth of the sore is constricted due to a hot abscess that has come upon it, one should not work on it, but rather administer moist and greasy substances; and the treatment includes plasters, and applies aqueous solutions that soften and moisten.
And if the child is on its side, and you can make it lie flat, then treat it as we have said for a living child;
and if one has no power to do so, then draw the needle through in sections, and leave nothing of the second skin.
And when you have done this, apply the treatment we have described for large abscesses that occur in the flesh;
and if bleeding occurs, apply cold compresses, and use other treatments as necessary.
And I saw a woman in whom the fetus in her womb had died, and when another was conceived after that one, it too was stillborn. After a long time, abscesses came to her mouth, and it swelled so much that it burst, and began to pus heavily.
I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I applied an emplastrum of strong attraction, and out came one bone, and after several days another. I marveled greatly, because there were no bones in the abdomen.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
I treated the wound, and laid bare the bones, until the woman was in better condition; and I tended to the woman for a long time in this way, and she would occasionally discharge a little pus from the area;
and I have recorded this chapter only because when masters encounter something unusual, they should know how to provide assistance.
Here follows the form of the compress, which is used in the books;
And to two turns at the two shoulders of the two ligaments. Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle than the retort, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the tube should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the wood should be one finger, and its length half a palm; and between the two ligaments should be two joints of the same tube, which are firmly fixed in each, half a palm long or a bit more;
and these two joints are placed at the mouth of the tube to open when the two horns are turned.
Another form, more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the appearance of the pincers; and have two heads with two joints, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers wide;
and when you wish to open the rectum with the instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging down and legs spread, then insert the two joints of the instrument together into the rectum, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand on the instrument as you did with the pincers equally, according to the amount you wish to open the rectum's opening, until it stretches as much as she desires.
These instruments are all mounted, and their kinds are multiplied; and when the physician has them prepared, the work is done more quickly, and they appear greater to people because of their size.
Do not despise the instrument just because you have not prepared it, for their need is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze by administering something suitable, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; and if she expels it because of this, so much the better.
If not, take a poultice and make a hole in the cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as chamomile, rue, anise, daisy, savory, and centaury; All these herbs, or some of them, should be boiled in water over the fire;
then place a tube in the opening of the pot and the other end in the mouth of the mare, and let it flow until the vapor comes inside the mare;
then make her sneeze, as we have said. The second joint jumps quickly.
And if she remains after this treatment and does not improve, instruct the patient to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in mastic of hellebore, and then place it on the affected area, and seek a second opinion; and when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the fetus does not fall during extraction;
but it is necessary to move it gently to the right and to the left, and then straighten; it will come and dislocate again.
And if the opening of the nostril is narrow, we have described the treatment of sneezing and the fumigation of herbs;
and if it does not respond to all that we have said, be careful not to force it;
but it is necessary to tie the affected area of the nostril to the woman's thigh, then administer an enema of tetrachordal ointment; it will soften and return, and come out on its own;
however, when it happens, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and troubles the patient. Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be given to them:
some of the ancients have tried fumigation with cabbage and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain her flowers and secondine is as follows:
And it is like glass in appearance, and one places the head subtly in the nature, and the cheeks wide over the fire;
and let the fumigation be over the charcoal, and continue it until it is spent, and then start another one.
Many children are born who do not have the anus developed, instead it is closed by fine membranes: Therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to pierce that spot properly with its appropriate tool, and not with a sharp spatula, and be careful so as not to touch it.
Then apply wet flax in wine and oil, then continue treating with ointment until he is healed.
And if you doubt that it will stay in place, insert a wire through the hole, and leave it there for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go to rooms.
And sometimes these obstructions come from the sudden closure of a wound or abscess; it is necessary to cut open that sudden closure: and treat it as we have said about the sinew of flesh.
Fistulas that come from below the fundament are nodular, and those that come near the fundament or in the space between the two parts may be one fistula or multiple;
And when that knotting is old, it works, and still moisture attends white or subtle poultice, and sometimes these fistulas are perforating;
And they are known by what comes out in diarrhea or flatulence when the patient has diarrhea, and sometimes worms come out.
And there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and reach up to the joint of the thigh, and up to the root of the knee.
And thus one knows the perforating fistula at the anus, and not perforating: And it is that you place your thumb at the base, and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
And if there is curvature, then insert a fine thread of linen or horsehair until you feel the thread or hair with your thumb;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no passage for discharge or gas or truth, as we have said: you know that it does not penetrate; then hurry to treat it.
And when the fistula reaches to the bladder or to the urethra, then it causes urination, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it reaches the joint of the thigh, then the thread comes to that place; If there is no curvature and the cause of the pain around it is not apparent, then it will become a bow (a permanent deformity), and medication or soothing ointment will be ineffective.
And in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure other than diligent work, and the vanity of foolish doctors who meddle with them.
In the case that is not persistent and is not old, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is when the patient lies down on their back with their spine between your hands;
and lift the patient's legs up to their thighs, and have the thighs inclined towards the abdomen; then insert a tent of linen, or one made of cloth if there is curvature, until you know where the tent reaches.
If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you must insert your finger there; if then you feel that the tent has been pierced,
and it is uncovered where you feel between your finger the surface or flesh, then you know that it is perforated; do not treat it further as it cannot be healed.
It is said that some can be well treated, but this happens rarely;
and the treatment that is done involves heating the cautery gently according to the width of the fistula, as was said before; and insert it completely hot into the fistula until it reaches near the fundament; and do this two or three times until you know that the charred parts are burned away, which resemble a feather of a bird;
and then treat it with moistened bandages soaked in butter until the flesh grows back, and then treat it with an ointment that promotes tissue growth and healing.
If he is thus healthy, it is well.
If this cannot be healed by any other means;
and if the pus enters and does not reach the root which is at the base, and there is a thick layer of flesh or tissue between your bone and the abscess, and you see the fistula under this covering of the chest; cut it from the beginning of the fistula and then cut towards the abscess, and apply the cautery afterward until you reach the head of the abscess; and the tent will be delivered, and it will fall;
then cleanse those damaged tissues that resemble a bird's feather, and leave none behind.
And if the flesh resists and does not allow you to reach the work, then cauterize it with fire or a dry medication.
For the fire cautery combines two good things: that is to say, the removal of adherent tissues, and stopping the blood and drying the moisture;
then treat moist tents with butter or ground substances until the place secretes pus, and remove the burnt tissues in the pus;
then treat the wound with hot applications and penetrating medicines that harden the tissue, and the medicines will dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes up from the deepest part of the fundament, and is distant from the body, touch that place with your finger and inquire about it.
If you feel the tent, and there are two layers of cloth or skin where it is close to piercing, there must be no fear but faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it down to the base, or if you can place tents and treat it as in the first case;
and do not go too deep, so that you do not cut the tissue that holds the base, and vomiting occurs unwillingly; then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it since it has been cut near the base, either by tenting or with another appropriate instrument; Then cleanse the wounded flesh that is in the wound as much as you can. Then strive to restore the wound and to heal the fistula in the part away from the fundament:
Then strive to restore the wound and to heal the fistula in the part away from the fundament: it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas occur in this manner: and it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is in the crease near the fundament under the skin, then take a probe with this shape at the tip: And insert the thread in a twisted manner into position two, and insert the probe along the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
If it is perforated in the margin of the fundament internally, then extract the thread from that passage, such that you insert your finger into the fundament;
and pull the head of the thread, and bring the two shoulders together, and hold them to each other, and leave it for one day or two;
and restrain it several times until the thread cuts through the tissue between them, and they separate;
then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
If the fistula does not open, pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too hard. For it is not proper to operate on it if it is too hard, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spinous process where one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side it is not, so that one does not cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
Emorrhoids occur in two manners: where they are inside the fundament, like grains of sand, and there are small and large ones, and in the course blood is present, and there may be one or more, and they are deviated from the fundament and at the head of the fundament;
but those that are deviated have little moisture, and still contain a small amount of yellow water or a small amount of blood, and they have the color of flesh;
and the treatment for those who have them inside the fundament is that you instruct the patient to abstain from going out of bed until the fundament heals, and this applies to children; hurry and grasp it with forceps, where you hold it with your nail, then cut it off at its root;
and if the hooks cannot hold them due to moisture, they take them with one finger, or with cotton, or with a piece of cloth; and extract them with your two hands, then cut them, and apply some warm powders that are used for cauterization; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the hemorrhoid cannot be removed, administer a harsh and sharp enema to the patient to cleanse what is in the anus so that it can exit freely; when the patient is constipated, and if the filaments are hard in the anus, then the treatment is light;
when the patient is constipated, and if the filaments are hard in the anus, then the treatment is light; And it is that you grasp them with your nail or pincers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and that they fear the incision by iron. It is necessary that you manage the suturing according to this manner:
It is necessary that you manage the suturing according to this manner: take the thread and twist it onto a needle, then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle from another side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide;
and tightly pull the thread, then tie it off, and remove the needle, and do this for all of them, leaving one to allow the excess blood to flow out;
Then place a moistened piece of cloth in rose oil or cerate on the foundation, and place it there, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave them until they fall off, and when they have fallen off, treat them with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
from the dryness of the bowels or foundation Often there is constipation of feces in the intestines, and by the constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is of no use. It is necessary that you cut with the tip of a spatula or your nail through the skin above, without leaving it to become moist. then treat it until it is dry as necessary;
and if it does not dry, then shave more forcefully than before until it heals significantly, and let it be scarred; then treat him until he is healthy.
with trembling The flea is a small striped appearance on the body, and moves very quickly;
and sometimes it is found in the cold, and one feels it as if frozen with shivering, and it spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose feather or a strong bird feather, and place the quill on the shiver, until the circles surround the shiver completely; then turn your hand around the quill until you cover all around the shiver, and move it quickly, and shake the shiver from its roots.
And if you wish, do this with a tube of linen or iron according to this form, and let it be fine underneath and threaded above: Do not pierce, to keep the hair from moving, and press the hairs.
And if you wish, cauterize the tremor as it is described before in the chapter on cauterization.
Sometimes a enema is made of silver or sorrel, or molten wool or bran;
and sometimes these instruments small and large are used, according to the needs of those to whom they are administered. Those who are treated in the care of children and those who are weak and in pain are small.
Those who are treated in the care of children and those who are weak and in pain are small. The form of the enema, small and large, is as follows, or the belly is bound in this manner:
and there should be a separation where the abdomen is bound as you see, and the rectum inside is perforated;
and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other side one;
And let the pouch where medicines are placed be made from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes, and have one fingers width between each hole, then insert a strong cord of rawhide thread in ten or so around, and join the pouch as if it were a drum. And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then administer as an enema;
and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the tip of the enema with oil or egg yolk, or similar substance, then insert it gently; Then the minister presses both hands together onto him until he is fully turned, then removes the enema, and lifts the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicine needs to come out, let it drain as much as possible; and if he sleeps one full night, then there is greater help.
And if you administer an enema in a case of diarrhea and the medicine wants to come out quickly, then repeat it until he is well.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament, or an abscess, then the enema should be as fine as for a child;
and this is the form of the fine enema in which the skin is stretched:
We have already said in the section about the treatment of wounds;
We will tell you about the treatments of hands and medicine, according to their fulfillment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and what they are made of.
The things by which wounds are made are from falling stones, and the cutting of swords and knives, or lances or staffs or arrows, or similar things;
or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from falling stones or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you fear the rising of a hot abscess: If you treat it immediately to staunch the bleeding from the wound, and let the dressing be on the opposite side of the injured part;
and prevent the patient from overindulging in wine and fatty meats.
And if he does not want to be bled, then let his food be light, and do not drink wine or eat meat.
and apply to the wound, if small abscesses occur, cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in styptic wine;
and if there is no warm abscess, then apply to the fresh wound that has not been exposed to air, powder which I will describe a little later;
And if the area is inflamed, apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar ones, and the edges cannot be brought together by approximation, then bring them together by suturing, as I will describe for belly wounds, of the suture.
If the wound is exposed bone and flaps open, cut it away; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick foods, such as boiled heads and wheat, and porridge, and similar things.
And if you find the skin is rotten and does not adhere to the bone, cut away all the decayed flesh, apply heat, then treat it.
and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be stopped with medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, secure it with a thread. And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: and it is that you put in this powder which the patient has sweated out.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take one part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; living charcoal three parts, and powder it finely, then apply it to the wound, pressing it firmly until it adheres well and joins with all its blood;
and then stir the mixture well, and leave it undisturbed if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with charcoal alone, when one has neither incense nor dragon's blood, but the burn has not yet healed the wound.
And if the burn has moved the wound, especially in winter, one must not apply this powder to it;
but apply some prepared ointments, or porridge made from oat flour with water and honey, until it discharges pus; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;
And I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, then there is no other remedy but to leave it untreated and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerve and causes it to retreat; and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
but let the medicine be warm, such as cheese washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and crushed cucumbers also washed in sweet water, and other minerals according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then stitch and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and she is swollen and full of blood, then pierce it at the lower part;
and if the artery is cut and bleeding occurs, then open it, tie it off, and cauterize it if necessary;
and if the windpipe is cut, or the throat, and the passage through which food passes is protected, then sew up the wound on the neck muscles, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural form; and then bind it securely, and leave it for several days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed;
and if the wound has impressed upon the bone, then probe it; and if there are pieces of bone, then remove them all if you can, and leave those that you cannot reach until the wound heals, and clear and align the openings;
and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and there is an abscess, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if air bubbles come out of the wound as the patient exhales: you then know that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it for the blood that does not stop flowing and returns to the heart, and kills the patient; but apply an adhesive ointment and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have an ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; then there will be no spasm, nor will there be an evil trembling of the heart or foreign matter intruding; and when you see good signs, then you know that the wound is safe. Treat her then with poultices and other treatments until she is healthy;
and if she cannot recover and the condition persists, then you know that there is an abscess;
treat her as one should. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, whether on the front or back, treat it as one would in such cases. if it is large, stitch it up;
and if it is small, treat it with powder; and if it is pressed against the bone, and in pieces, then probe the wound, and tie off any separated tendons; and if they are not separated, let the wound heal, which will ease the extraction;
and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
from the rupture of the abdomen
The rupture of the abdomen is great, medium, and small;
in the large wound, sometimes the intestines protrude, or the nerves of the intestines, causing an intrusion of air;
and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because putting the intestines back in too quickly can be harmful if they are not placed carefully over time;
Because the intestines swell immediately when they feel the cold, they retract further, and for this reason it is better to move the middle wound, because thereby the intestines are moved back to their place more than with others two.
And you should know that the rupture of the abdomen occurs in four manners:
the two common sutures occur in the seam of the abdomen, and the sutures of other wounds on the body are also common to those other wounds;
and they are still more proper with the seam of the abdomen, and I will say each one and explain them.
I say that when the wound is small and some part of the intestine protrudes, it is a difficult thing to replace, which can be done in one of the two methods: For the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a manner: moisten a sponge with lukewarm water only, or boil it in scalding water with cypress and spikenard, and irrigate the intestines until the swelling subsides;
and sometimes use constrictive wine, which is thick to help reduce the swelling.
And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestines with water in which hellebore and mallows have been boiled, for this gradually opens the passages;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment should be to avoid cutting unless there is great necessity for it;
and this is the instrument for splitting:
cut inside at the curvature and not further out, and see here the form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump outwards, place them back according to their natural form in their proper place if you have the power, for this is better.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part below the abdomen, place the head and feet higher than the lower parts, and likewise if there is a rupture of the abdomen in one of the two parts, raise the injured part higher than the other;
And thus must you administer what I say regarding large and medium wounds.
In small wounds, apply what is appropriate for them, then hold the compassionate minister who covers the entire wound with his hand, and bring together the edges.
and this is the common method of suturing, which involves taking one or more needles according to the width of the wound, then leaving about an inch from the edge of the wound and inserting a needle with strong thread. and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the suture material, which is underneath the skin, until you pierce it from that part, and bring together the two ends of the suture material.
Then draw a thread doubled around the needle on both sides, then bring together the two edges of the wound, and leave one finger's space, and insert another needle;
Then tie the thread as you did for the first needle, and continue doing so as needed with the needles until the entire wound is closed;
and the needles should be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, because the fine needles cut through all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter properly: that is why they should be medium-sized;
and it is not appropriate to insert the needles too far from the flesh and skin, as they may cut and damage the wound before it heals;
and then cover the points of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and place tents or cloths over the needle points to keep them covered, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use one or two needles.
The second method of sewing is common, and it is that you bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the flesh with one needle where there is a strong thread in between;
and when you have pierced these edges all four together, then pull the needle back to the part where you began, in the manner one sews cloth;
and place a space between each seam as thick as a thin thread;
This seam is known to the surgeon, and I stitched a wound that a man had in his abdomen, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and intestines were protruding about two palms, and the wound was in the middle of the abdomen.
I returned the intestine to him after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound was sealed up for fifteen days, and I treated him, and he became well.
And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I placed fresh cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle, and bring it from the outer part to the inner part;
when it has pierced the skin directly through, seize the head of the thread or suture where you inserted the needle, and have it pierce from the inner part to the outer part;
and the method of this suture is that you sew as tailors do with fur, and leave once the thread on one side, and take it up again on the other, until the entire suture is complete.
The second method of suture, which Galen described properly, is as some do, who naturally bring together the two parts and fasten one end of the thread to the other in such a manner:
Pierce an needle at the nape of the neck nearby, and pierce only that place, and leave the two heads of the shoulder alone; then turn the needle and pierce from the outer part to the inner part, to the two heads of the shoulder;
then pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inner part, in two other nape points that are on the opposite side;
and this is the usual method of suturing and the most common.
Galien says this word, and some witness it, that one must suture the abdomen with two needles, each having thread.
And one must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts;
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, it is more painful than ruptures in other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the arrow had drawn it, then reset the intestines and sew it;
then apply powder that heals flesh, and if the arrow has drawn it, then apply any available ointment until the wound absorbs it; And cut the thread, and let the suture be sealed, and the wound; then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;
and if you do not have medicines, place on it as soon as it begins to discharge, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you have no need for other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you fear that the wound may affect the principal limbs, then it is necessary to moisten fine wool in warm infused oil or rose oil, and place it around the angles, and under the armpits;
And if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and it often happens, then administer an enema of boiled black wine, and especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestines;
And pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is because of the smallness of the veins that are there, and the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity to the nature of the nerves.
And if the spleen jumps out of the wound, put it back in as with the intestine, while it is fresh.
And if it is old and has turned green or black, then you must ligate the area that is black so that no blood flows out, as there are veins and arteries there;
Then cut those that are between the ligament, and let the two heads hang from below the wound up to where it falls to ease the extraction when the edges fall in, and the wound will heal.
of the rupture of the eye
When the intestines are pierced and the wound is small, it can sometimes be repaired in some people, as I witnessed a man being speared in the abdomen with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which feces and gas exited;
I treated it as best I could, and did not stop suturing until he was healed, and the flesh closed.
And when I saw him cauterize it, I feared the patient would suffer pain in his abdomen; and he did not suffer any pain but improved in disposition, eating and drinking;
and some experienced practitioners say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be treated in such a manner: take large flax seeds, then bring the edges of the wound together, and when the seed opens up, place it between the two edges so that they hold it tightly;
and then cut the seed in half, and it stays in place so that it cannot be dislodged, then place another seed similarly as before, until the entire wound is covered; And sew the wound.
If the thread is inserted into the intestine, and it causes no harm to the patient, then one can tie the intestine with a thin thread that is cut from an animal's intestine, in such a manner:
take the tip of this intestinal thread which is very clean, and then wind a thin linen thread around it tightly, then put the thread on the needle, and sew the intestine with it, and secure it in the opening;
and this method of suturing intestines is not stronger than according to the way of trust and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the major intestinal areas, there is no remedy or healing, except for great skill.
of a fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it suppurates, is generally called a "fistula," especially when it is deep and hollow.
And a fistula is according to truth an abnormal hard and white swelling where one does not feel pain, and it is also branched like the quill of a bird;
and sometimes clear and hollow, and at other times thick; sometimes small, and at other times larger;
and I have spoken about this in the section on wounds, that any wound which is not healed and lacks flesh is due to one of the nine causes: which is to say, due to the thinness of the blood or flesh; or because of its nature; For because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, do not allow new flesh to grow; For where there is too much pus; where the wound is infected, and the matter is of poor quality; where the medicine is not good for the treatment; for because the corruption is like a plague; for because the property in that region is slow to digest, and delays healing, and swells by nature; where there are veins in the bone:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Now I shall tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is done by handwork.
Know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that occur in the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or on the face, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or at some of the ribs, or along the spine, or at any joint in the hands or feet; and some occur in the principal part of the limb and similar places.
And all fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is no cure except for diligent treatment and lack of ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I have mentioned, and you trust in the cure, and you wish to know it, then take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, and insert it;
and if the fistula is curved, then search with a delicate probe of lead, for lead can bend around the curvature;
and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot properly probe it with probes, then irrigate through one of the openings, for the moisture passes quickly from one opening to another, and clean it;
then probe carefully to your best ability to determine if there are any bones or nerves, and inquire thoroughly from the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where they feel it;
And when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places I have told you about, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the pus and the corrupted flesh that are inside;
And then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep straight ahead, you must cut deeply as much as possible, then place moistened bandages soaked in hot medicine into it, up to the top of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
And then apply healing salves to regenerate the flesh until it is healed;
And if it is not healthy because of this, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it away.
If a vein or artery does not trouble the principal members as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, remove it until all the corruption is gone, then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth until it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy and continues to swell as before, know that you have not yet reached the core;
then expose and search until you reach the depth, and remove all the corruption, then repair the area;
And if he is thus well, it is good. If not, you should know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach. there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupted bone and you can pull it out with forceps, then remove it with the appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, do not leave even one.
and if the moisture opposes you and there is no mistake or fear, then cut through both the moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them at once, place on the wound something that generates putrefaction, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then they will have the bones more easily.
And if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then raise the putrefaction only until all the black matter is removed, and then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of what is corrupted, and it reaches the substance of the bone; then it is necessary to sew and cover up to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you can take it as an example and aid in your work.
He was about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to delay in opening it;
but the physician, through their folly, worked so much on it that they opened the abscesses greatly, and it corroded much matter, and became a fistula, and many holes appeared where all discharged pus and moisture from the body;
and many physicians treated him for two years, and none showed skill in the art of hands until I was called to it, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what was discharging through the holes in large quantities; And the body of the young man became red, and he had a yellowish complexion.
I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that they came together from all parts of the leg.
I then hurried and inserted into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, which was corrupt and perforated, and the corruption extended to the inner part of the bone;
I treated what appeared to be the corrupt bone, and I believed there was no other corruption besides what I removed;
and began to treat the wound with internal medicines over a long period of time, but it could not heal;
and then I tried again, and exposed the bone as before, and found that the corruption continued in the bone, which I treated, and then removed, and attempted to heal the area; but I did not do so much as copying around a palm's breadth of the bone, and I stripped it bare to its full depth, then restored it with medicines; and he was healed and sealed quickly, and it did not require repeating the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and out of fear of death that I had for him. For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was entirely healthy, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, and he was well disposed with no harm or contrary effect at all, neither going nor coming.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it must be treated in this manner: take some linen, and pull it at the head of the exposed bone, and instruct someone to stretch it above. and place another linen bandage thicker than the first one, and tie it over the flesh that is around the bone, and stretch the head, so that you draw the corrupted flesh inward, and uncover the flesh at the spot where you wish to treat, so that the bandage does not hurt the flesh;
and place a torch on a table below the bone to move aside the corrupted flesh;
and continue scraping as long as possible until the corruption can be seen and felt, and scrape again further.
And if the bone is corrupted and it is not apparent, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, then uncover all the flesh.
then place the torch below, and then scrape from one part to another where the corruption is, and let the scraper follow along the length of the corruption as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut away the corrupted joint, and scrape the bone on the other side where it contains;
And if the corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut them.
And if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or foot, it is a very serious matter, but nevertheless you must inquire about that corruption and how it appears to you. And cleanse it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve oppose you.
And know that the incisions and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. And for this reason, it is necessary to prepare for each kind of work its instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument of which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and by the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
The head may become dislocated either due to something inside or due to being forced out;
and when you have treated that corruption with the cure of medicines, and they do no good, then it is necessary to amputate the limb at the place where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes by this from death, or by the greater evil of losing the limb;
And the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and then the blackness spreads, gradually spreading corrosion from one limb to another, and takes over the whole body;
Hasten to cut it if this is due to the bite of venomous beasts such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar, if the corruption is at the top of the head, then cut it, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
And if it reaches the hand, cut it at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm;
and if it reaches the arm, cut it with a knife;
and if it passes the cut, it is fatal, and no remedies outside of its quantity of virtue help;
and do this entirely when corrosion comes to the foot: if it affects the first joint, then treat the next joint after it;
and if it comes to the foot, treat the entire foot; and if it ascends to the leg, then treat at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die;
and the method of treating or bandaging the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister with one cord downwards, and another minister with the other cord upwards, and you cut the flesh which is between the two cords at one span wide, until the bone is uncovered;
Then cut the cloth where the silk is, and place a piece of linen on each side so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, and do not cause another injury or abscess to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the area quickly or apply some constricting powders;
Then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to a man in such a case:
It happened that he got a black corruption that seemed burned by fire, and this corrosion started on his heel of the foot, spreading to the entire foot;
and when the lord saw the corruption, he hastened to cut off the foot, and was healed;
and a long time after, the corruption returned to his thumb, and he came to me, and I applied counter-irritants after purifying the body, and could not stop the corrosion;
and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, as I had hope of counter-irritating the matter; and I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's vitality was weak;
and he completely despaired and returned to his land, and hastened to cut off his hand, and was healed;
and I do not have this ready except for what one does differently, when there is need for it.
Sometimes an abscess occurs in the flesh and remains so long that it causes a large collection of pus; and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus flows out, leaving the area healed, just like a vessel; and the skin that is above it is as delicate as fine linen, and does not extend to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a condition is called "sound," and is not called "fistula";
but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone deeply, then it is called "fistula";
And you should cut the skin all around, especially when it is thin, like a piece of cloth; and do not worry about its decay.
And if you trust that the skin will adhere and there is no risk of decay, and the skin is thick with flesh, treat it as follows by enema:
check if the swelling is large, and if the pus that comes out has a foul smell, then administer an Egyptian enema made as follows: Take honey, oil, and litharge in equal parts, and put it in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take some of it according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and use it as an enema, and hold the passage. and leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it while straining.
do this multiple times until the breast is cleansed, and the pus is removed.
and sometimes an enema of ash water is given when this medicine is not present; take ashes from vine wood, pour water over it, let it strain, and use it as an enema until you know the breast is well cleansed.
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then give an enema of water and honey with a little bit of litharge powder. When you make the enema of honey and mixed wine, let the honey have the property to cleanse and wash, and the wine softens the flesh;
and when you have done this, and you trust that the area is well cleansed, then use an enema of what promotes tissue growth, and prepare a poultice with rose oil and in wine;
when you administer an enema of certain medications and ointments, the properties of which I have mentioned when discussing ointments;
and if the opening of the area is small and the tube for the enema cannot enter, widen it with a tool slightly, and insert a pad of Egyptian ointment or mastic ointment until it is widened;
And if the wound is too wide, then sew it up but leave enough space only for the place where the clister can enter, and if the hole from which pus flows is above, cut it lower down.
and if you cannot cut beneath the swelling as you wish, prepare it in such a way that the pus flows to the lowest point where it is, for when the pus is deep, do not allow flesh to regenerate there, and if you cannot cut beneath the swelling as you wish, then prepare it in this manner: so that the pus flows gently downward, and leave nothing of the pus there;
so that the pus flows gently downward, and leave nothing of the pus there; and take consolidating medicines to apply over the wound, and place a linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then cut in the forceful places the hole of the chest larger than the first one, then apply an ointment underneath another cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the wound to alleviate the pain, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days once;
and the one who is over the hole of the chest should often remove it to alleviate the pain, and check what comes out of the wound, whether it is poison or too much or little, or digestible or undigested;
and be cautious if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in such a manner and you see that the nature rises up over the wound, then know that the chest is healing, and approach the treatment;
And then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
For there are people who take too long to treat flesh wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if undigested food remains in the breast for many days, know that the chest does not resolve;
and if the chest is slow to improve and has been prolonged, add drying but moist medicines in substance and dry in virtue, such as a diaphoretic ointment, for it contains much vitriol, and this is the last remedy;
take a diaphoretic ointment, and make it with rose oil, and dilute it equally with old wine;
then apply the ointment and use it;
and this same thing cooks better when thickened, when a healing salve is not present, take mallow and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire;
and then spread it on a cloth and place it over the chest, and sometimes administer an aromatic long herb, and roots of celestial lilies, which are like fennel flour and centaury; and use simple or compound remedies: grind them, and make powder, and mix it with the honey I mentioned, and use it;
And if the treatment is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then you know that the corruption has reached deep, and impresses upon the bone, or on hard members, or on ligaments; if the treatment of the fistula is as we have said before.
Panarisis is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the thumb, or of the foot, or occasionally arises in other toes;
and when they are old and no care is taken, then the abscess becomes severe, and it spreads and discharges pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps it will spread entirely;
And the corrosion reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the head of the shoulder is swollen, and the color is bad.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment is of no use, then you must cut away all the excess that remains around the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward. The cautery is a great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail adheres to the flesh and begins to hurt, and the edge becomes inflamed, then you must place a strip under the nail that is hurting the flesh, and lift it up, and cut away the affected flesh carefully and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it out, and apply force, because as long as the corrupted part of the bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the toe corrupted, cut it at I as has been said before, then treat it until it is healed;
and if he is wounded and feels great pain, then it is necessary that you treat him first;
then cut the nail of the thumb diagonally across it, and be careful not to cut into the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, place something on top that soothes.
The second joint that is born in some people's hands is entirely fleshy, and sometimes it has bones, and at times there is a nail, and some of them are born at the root of the joint, where the origin is in some of us in the flesh near the two joints.
Those who are born with some deformity of the toe do not move it, and those who are born at the joint of the toe may possibly move it;
The body of one who is fleshy is so light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born with a condition at the root of the joint is difficult to treat: so hold the copper gently.
In the one who is born or must be at the rear end, you should first cut the flesh around smoothly to the bone, then cut the bone in one stroke appropriately for that person, then treat it until it is healed.
The wound that comes to both together comes by birth, or by the union of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
You must cut that solder so that the parts repair themselves according to their natural forms; then place between two cloths or dampened cloths in rose oil so that they do not solder; or place between two pieces of fine lead until the wound is sealed as required.
If a wound comes to one of them with the palm, then cut that wound as is appropriate.
Veins are thick and wrapped, full of melancholic excesses, which come to many parts of the body;
and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Therefore, you should administer enemas to them at times, and then treat them with the herb basil.
The iron treatment is according to two methods: one involves cutting them and drawing out the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein and draw all of the blood out.
The procedure for bleeding is as follows: First, warm the leg with hot water very strongly until the thick blood becomes thin, then stretch the patient's leg from above the thigh to below the knee;
Then cut the vein in I, II, or III places, of a wide size, then lift it to draw out the black blood to your hand, from one side to the other, until as much blood comes out as the strength of the patient can endure;
and then dress it, and instruct him to eat foods that include black broth;
and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and it harms the patient.
The treatment of this condition follows this manner: raise the patient's leg if there is much hair, then place it in a bath, and wash the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swell the veins;
And if you do not have bath water, heat it by the fire, and then cut directly into the vein at the length to the knee, or in the part inside of the ankle;
then work the skin to the tendon, and strip the vein from each side until it feels firm when pressed;
and it is seen as red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord;
then raise the edge inside until it is raised from the skin, and then gently stretch it to the tendon, then cut another place above three fingers;
then strip the skin over the vein until it feels firm, then lift to the edge as you did before, and stretch it to another tendon as you did previously;
Then cut another length, or more if you need it, then lift it, and cut to the joint of the foot, then draw it out and lift until the second length;
then extract it piece by piece until it comes out completely, then cut it;
and if you cannot draw and lift it, insert a needle along the strong doubled thread, then lift and draw it, and place one below the next row, turning your hand from side to side until it comes out; and be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, it cannot be drawn or lifted, and this causes harm to the patient;
and when you have treated it all, place wool moistened in wine and rose oil over the wound site; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it quickly, but do not sever it; and treat it as we have said before.
The shape of the knife used to cut the vein is curved, and it does not chop but cuts the vein;
and it is of large curvature, because if it were fine, it would cut the vein too deeply, but it should be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
This vein appears in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil where there is no moisture;
and by chance it may appear in other parts besides the legs, and this happens due to the putrefaction that comes beneath the skin, as it arises within the body like serpents and worms, appearing between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes a very great inflammation in the leg, then it changes places, and the vein begins to come out, as if a root of a plant.
When the wound is open, you should wrap it with a piece of cloth about one and a half to two fingers wide, tie it securely, and let the bandage hang down the leg. Every time there is any looseness or movement, wrap it around the bandage again and tie it.
and if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining piece, but do not cut it at its root until it is fully out. For if you cut it, it enters the flesh, causing an abscess and putrefaction in that place, and a bad illness;
For this reason, it must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing should remain in the body;
and sometimes this vein, when treated, is V palms in length or even X, and one hand of mine has been at a distance of X palms in length from where it exits, and when you cut it, I release I rays or perforations, and pierce it to the bottom so that everything comes out;
and empty the matter that is inside, and apply to the place medicine that discharges putrefaction for some days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
And sometimes this vein branches off, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and there is much perforation, and thus it often bleeds;
Treat it then as we have said before.
worms that are born between the skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "the buffalo disease," because it often occurs among buffaloes, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body moving up and down, and one can feel it well as it moves from limb to limb, until it breaks the skin where it goes, and causes pain.
and is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms and snakes and maggots in the intestines;
and be wary of its malicious nature, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, it may by chance enter, and destroy the eye; and this happens often.
When you see the need to cure and drain it, one must not delay once it has spread:
then it is necessary to bind the area above and below with a strong and tight bandage, then cut into it and drain it forcefully, and if the pus is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you cannot find it, cauterize the area with fire until it subsides;
and the greatest harm it causes is that it can corrupt the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the head close to the eye, then firmly grasp the eyebrow area, then cut above it, and draw out the fire.
and the patient should use cleansing of the body with soluble medicines for purging bad humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain limbs, and can move from one limb to another;
and I saw what I tell you. I was called to see a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
And immediately after, the flesh rises like a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything, like quicksilver when it is cut from its place;
the pain leaves that place and fixes itself in the shoulder, and then a little while later runs throughout the entire body until it reaches the other arm;
then she told me that it quickly circled around her body, as I saw it happen.
I marveled greatly at how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease behave in such a manner. Still, I had heard of many who wished to move pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it myself as I did in this woman;
and I thought it was because the woman had a dry body and her veins exposed, which made this windiness constrained;
And they do not perceive according to this reasoning for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins that lie flat.
And when you wish to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then place it above and below quickly, and then incise until that windiness constricts at its site; and cauterize the site;
and if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it as one would an accumulation of wind, such as with pungent pills, and snake skin pills, and similar others.
Arrows vary according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they strike.
The diversity among them is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and hairy, and smooth. and of those which have two angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are pieces;
and when it falls on any limb, it falls in two ways: where it falls on a principal limb, such as the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs. When it falls then in any part of these limbs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you next, become apparent: you should be wary of extracting this arrow, for death follows in many cases; and when these bad signs do not appear, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then remove it and treat the wound.
And the signs of the brain when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, and jumps the meninges which are over the brain, are when scotoma and headache and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasm and disturbance of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes it passes without meninges from the nostrils, or from the ears; and sometimes speech and voice are lost; and from the wound moisture white like milk comes out, and it also flows like pus;
and if these signs appear to you, then proceed with the treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is inside.
The sign of an arrow when it falls in the heart is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and sometimes the arrow moves like hair, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat occur, and syncope sets in: then you can be sure that death will follow shortly.
And the sign of the arrow that pierces the windpipe is that white foam spurts from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow falls in the covering of the hip, it is near the small ribs; and causes great pain and groaning and sighing; and the movement affects all the shoulder limbs.
And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, perhaps some undigested flesh will spurt from the wound.
And if the arrow strikes in the abdomen, and no piece of it can be felt through any part of the intestines, there is no hope for treatment or for extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes pouring forth, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other limb, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm pit and spine of the back and ribs and thigh and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to many conditions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for this reason do as I say.
It happened to a man that an arrow fell in his skull at the root of his nose: I tried it, and I extracted it from the other side behind the ear, and he was healthy without further issue.
And I extracted an arrow that fell into the fatty tissue under the eyelid above the eyeball, and the arrow was buried, and little could be reached except for the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was large from a Turkish bow, entirely of light iron without feathers;
The joint was sound, and no bad accidents occurred.
And he extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears:
I grasped the barbs, and was subtle enough to extract it, and the Christian was saved.
And I extracted an arrow from a man who had it embedded in his stomach, and I thought he would die;
and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change; I cut around the arrow, and managed it skillfully, and forcefully extracted it, and he did not suffer any bad consequences.
And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow embedded in his back, and the wound is sealed over;
and the arrow remains inside him, and he does not change his natural disposition in any way, nor finds harm in any of his natural functions.
And you wish to treat another man who has an arrow shot into his face, and the wound is sealed over; and it remains thus without him suffering great pain;
and many other similar cases.
And treat an arrow in the head of one of the king's princes, which was embedded between his ears, and it was slightly inclined to the right side; And the arrow was completely buried.
I was called to treat her three days after she fell ill. I found the wound very narrow.
I examined her thoroughly and found nothing. and she felt pain and discomfort behind her right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I applied a poultice to the area to prevent swelling; and the location of the arrow became apparent.
and the location of the arrow became apparent. I applied the poultice for several more days, and reopened the wound, and the patient remained like this for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nose for one day;
and he tells him to do it. I applied a corrosive medicinal agent to the wound for several days until it was open, and I probed it, feeling the head of the arrow that lay in place.
then I inserted the corrosive medicine into the wound opening until the head of the arrow became visible.
and after about four months, I carefully enlarged the wound so that I could place the forceps inside, but it would not come out.
then I continued to devise and craft various instruments until one day I was able to grasp it with well-made forceps, as described at the end of this chapter, and removed it, then treated the wound.
And the physician judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I then repaired it, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was completely healed.
I have told you about the nature of extracting some arrows, so place your care on what I do not say, for books cannot encompass everything;
but wise masters compare well with great things, and with what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in the descent of strange things that occur in this art.
I say that arrows exit from the members in which they are embedded in two ways: at the place where they enter, or from another part;
and when it jumps out where it entered, it is an arrow entering the flesh, and sometimes it may jump out immediately now.
And if it does not jump out now, wait until the flesh around it is swollen and then ease the exit;
and if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days and soften it each day;
and then it will jump out; and if it does not, carefully cut around it with a sharp instrument until the area around it is enlarged, and then extract it.
And if the arrow is lodged in the body where it cannot be seen, search for it throughout the entire body; and if you feel it, then draw it with some suitable instrument;
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut as much as necessary so that the wound is large enough;
and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that hold it in place, remove the flesh that is embedded from two sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the barbs so that you may pull it out;
and be careful that you do not break the arrow, as pulling it out would then be more difficult.
And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the area around the site is healed, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the bleeding from the wound opposes you, then administer what we have said about its treatment in its chapter;
and beware of cutting the nerve and the vein, and proceed cautiously so that you can draw out the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and place the patient in the position he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest aid there can be, and if you cannot do so, then place him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, where it is apparent some part of it remains, or where the skin is swollen in such a way that it can be seen or felt clearly:
Cut above, where the forceps can grasp, and then extract: do it now with strength.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around until it enters the bone, then expand the bone, and pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it be for now, and then restart the extraction until it comes out;
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, cut it off at the base;
and if the shaft breaks off, and you wish to administer cautery, then apply the instrument cautiously so that the tip of the arrow penetrates into the blade of the instrument;
and then cut forcefully, and if the arrow is embedded, apply the instrument with its tip entering in, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is contaminated, you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if possible, then treat the wound as necessary.
And if the arrow falls into the thigh or in the belly or at the bladder or in the groin, and it is close, and you can cut over it, do so;
and be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, then extract it, and then sew up the wound if necessary; and care for it until it is healed.
The shape of the pliers used to treat arrows is like the beak of a bird, and see here the form:
And there are many ways to do this: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
The shape of the hair awl is also like the feather of a bird, to pierce at the tip of the arrow, as shown here is the form:
There are thirty-one veins from which one can bleed to health, sixteen of which are in the head, namely: The blows which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries which are in the two visible temples; and the two veins which are in the sockets of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein which is on the forehead; and the vein which is at the top of the nose; and the two jugulars which are in the neck; and the two veins which are on the upper lip, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins from which one usually bleeds are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side, and laypeople call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and laypeople call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side, and laypeople call it "vein of the belly," and it is near the fossa, and this is the one from which one usually bleeds, which appears clearly on the forearm.
And the saphenous vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is near the curvature of the shin bone on the left side, and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nexus," which is at the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins near those.
The treatment of veins that are behind the ears helps with chronic catarrhs and migraine;
And the qualities of the surgeon, as I tell you, are that he raises the head of the patient, and rubs the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck with a bandage, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: feel them then with your finger, and where you feel the pulse below your finger, make an incision;
then take the lancet, and insert it below the vein up to the bone, then raise your hand along the entire length of the vein, and cut through both the skin and the vein well two fingers wide, and let out as much blood as you wish;
Then strain and bind it until it is healed;
and I have already mentioned the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The treatment of the two arteries that are in the two temples is worth for chronic migraine, and severe headache, and habitual ophthalmic conditions, and for the continuous flow of tears from the eyes;
and the qualities of the practitioner are as I say: and the patient should squeeze his neck until the two veins become distinctly visible; and feel the pulse below your thumb, and then cut into it;
Then lift the heart above the vein towards your thumb index, and insert the lancet beneath, lift the vein upwards, and cut it, just as you did with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
Then loosen the patient and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then bind it tightly, and leave it until it is healed;
and we have already spoken about their cutting and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
The vein of the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic vein for treating old face diseases, and for migraine, and redness;
and the quality is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting it, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fossaor", of which here is its form:
And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then release the patient's neck, and tie off the vein until it is secure, and sometimes the work is done with a flame.
Nevertheless, it must not be that the flame is too sharp; and proceed carefully across, as the bone is close, and by chance the flame may break when it is fine.
The salve of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps the eyes, and for eyelid inflammation, and for redness in the eye, and for sties on the eyelash, and for diseases of the face;
and the quality of its application is that the patient should pull their neck with a twist using some kind of cloth, as before;
then apply the salve, and let it be applied thinly, a little along the flame shape a little wide, because there is no flesh there. And if the flames are fine, they might break;
then let the blood flow as much as you need, and then cover it with cloth, and bind it well.
The vein of the nose is beneficial for fever, and for furious diarrhea, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old;
and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient should squeeze their neck, then press their nose with your left hand, and take a fine flame long, and place it between the two nostrils, because the vein does not appear well otherwise, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then bandage it for a night, for it heals very quickly;
The salve of the two binders helps in the constriction of the almaine, and at the beginning of mixing, and for many diseases, and for empetigo, and for corrosions, and for herpes, and for abscesses;
and the properties of the salve are such that the patient constricts their neck below one and the other, as we have said;
and let the master stand over the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then open the vein on the long side slightly, then draw blood moderately, as much as is necessary;
Then do the same on the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and bind all the veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound may heal.
of the healing of wounds The healing of veins in the lips above helps with swelling in the mouth, and decay of gums, and splits in the lips, and nose, and around them.
And the treatment is to have the patient sit before you, and bind his neck as I have said; then turn the lip and examine the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which can be recognized by their black color and by the small black veins around them:
so then probe both veins, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, probe the larger one on each side, and do the same for the two veins above and below, because it is done in the same manner.
Remove the tonsil from the root The healing of the veins that are behind the tongue helps after the healing of the cephalic vein, and this is at the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the healer are such that the patient urinates into your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and you look underneath on each side for a black vein:
treat then one and the other, but do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
The veins of the arm that are commonly treated are treated in two ways:
either by cutting the entire arm with a sharp blade, or an olive wood scalpel like cutting knives, and it is called "anesil"; And they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame of fire is very famous, and it is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open veins that are full of thick, visible blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
and it is more subtle and pointed, and is for bleeding fine veins, where there is fine yellow blood.
The basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen;
and it is necessary for the physician to bleed wisely and to avoid the artery which is behind. And if he cuts the artery, and continuous bleeding occurs, he must stop it, as I have said; and must not prick the flame, but cut as before.
And if the basilica does not appear clearly, then you must extract it, and change to another one; where you want any vein of it, or heal in its place the vein on the arm: it appears clearly; and the cup to the flame as before, as we have said.
And if you want to know the place of the healing, then you must extract the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse; Then mark the place of the bone, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein on the forearm; and be careful not to hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it flowing upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is arterial blood: hurry then, and place your finger firmly, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, as this often happens; bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient;
And let it be under fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the wound is not staunched, and it is necessary, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head will follow. and staunch the wound.
And take the bark of figs, and cut it, and take one of the halves and apply it well until the other day;
if the wound is staunched, it is good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that staunch blood;
And the stiffness is not severe in many positions due to the small area of the wound, and the strength of the arm's ligament.
The median vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above and the body below, as it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to be cautious near the nerve that is below, and if he presses too deeply, and finds the nerve, it swells and the patient suffers greatly, and perhaps cannot be healed;
And this nerve is often apparent, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, then you must handle it with a tranquilizing instrument; And avoid the nerve as much as possible.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make the incision lengthwise.
The bloodletting of the cephalic vein helps to draw blood from the head and aids the eyes;
And it is necessary to bleed by puncturing with an olive blade or a myrtle blade, for this is the safest of all veins, as it has no nerves or arteries nearby. Nevertheless, it is necessary to find the most gentle place, and do not worry if it is not possible the first time, and try again. And sometimes the area swells in some people when it is done for the first time, but it does not cause any harm.
The quality of the salve is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about medicine is that it is not aimed except to preserve health and to avoid future diseases;
and let the medicine be administered through one of the three veins that are in the arm: that is to say, cephalic, facial, and basilic; and one should administer medicine at the beginning of spring, in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear;
and one should administer medicine on the first day or the third, after two hours or three of the day.
The medicine administered for diseases has no fixed time, but should be given when needed, day or night, at any hour and in all seasons;
And it is not appropriate to bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor women carrying a fetus from the fourth month until the seventh month. And one should not treat the elderly who have surpassed sixty years.
And when someone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary for them to cleanse their intestines with a mild enema if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not attract from the intestines harmful excesses detrimental to the principal limbs;
nor should one bleed those who are overly full of meat, nor drunkards, until they have sobered up, nor hydropics;
and if one wishes to bleed after colic pain, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent sexual activity, and labor, lack of sleep, and fasting, and anything that exhausts all the strength, whether from something in food or from the body;
Then subtly thin the humors, if the blood is thick, through food and drink and medicine, if you have the power to do so;
Then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood, and bleed from the vein around the elbow, as we have said.
and on that day, guard yourself from work, and from piercing, and from excess, and similar things;
and be tied and joyful, and let the patient lie higher than the person being bled, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the bandage moderately, for if it is too tight, the blood cannot flow.
and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt;
then moisten the needle with a drop of old oil, then place the thumb of your left hand on the vein below the area where you wish to puncture it, so that the vein does not move when pricked.
For there are veins that move like cords when the needle is applied, and some are full of air, so that when you place the needle, it recoils from the needle, and thus cannot be opened. and if the vein is too narrow, then it is necessary that the phlebotomist be cautious in these matters.
And if the vein acts for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence again a bit below that place or above quickly, if the area is not swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient is frightened, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm: by chance, abscesses may come;
do not enter the bath, then restart the treatment if it pleases them;
and if the opening is small, cauterize the skin gently and if you doubt that it will not release as much blood as you wish, apply heat directly to that opening.
and work quickly, so that the area does not swell; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the area swollen, do not repeat the incision, and place a little poultice of oil on it, for it alleviates the body of blood, and the poultice is soothing in this place.
and thus apply the poultice of oil to each incision you make on the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and this same poultice causes thistle and pain when it is applied to the area; So carefully feel the pulse and divide it when it is too large.
And if there comes a large abscess, which happens many times, especially when the force is not sufficient at the time of the vein opening being small, then hurry, and place on it a sponge moistened in warm water and vinegar for about an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood comes from the vein, and if a black or green discoloration remains at the site for several days, it does no harm; and if you wish, place some substance of aloes or myrrh dissolved in juice of calamint, mastix, or similar.
And many times there is an abscess and swelling at the base of the thumb:
Place your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft upon pressing with your hand, then that swelling is bad. Avoid placing any of the things we have mentioned, for by chance it could cut into an artery;
but apply the dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And draw from each the blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it continue until it becomes thin. And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for one who is full and swollen, and needs to have blood drawn, make the incision wider, and let the veins be wide;
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed them little and often, and this should be done by cutting across, not deep;
and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and is better than long or wide incisions.
And for one whose body needs nourishment during bleeding, give moist bread in pomegranate juice; If it is heated, let the blood flow three or four times. And if it has a cold complexion, before bleeding give him moist bread in syrup of musk, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and strongly scented syrup.
And if he faints after the loss of much blood, it is necessary that he drinks broth of flesh, and fragrant syrup, and uses other things which we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to bleed his arm and let blood again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he lets blood a little at a time according to the quantity of his continuing strength.
And who wishes to bleed his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, should let blood seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And who wishes to be bled from another place should do so on the second day or the third.
For it has much blood within the body which is already heated, and causes fever; so it is necessary to let out a large quantity of blood, and to widen the passage until it flows easily; after you have considered all the conditions for bleeding, and place your hand on the pulse when bleeding, so that death does not occur due to carelessness, as this often happens when bleeders are negligent;
And it is not right when you wish to dislocate the arm, and let blood a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly upon it; nor if he is crooked, that he extend the arm quickly, for it would be worse;
but leave it until it heals from the second time; and you apply the tip of the flame, until the blood which has coagulated in the vein opening flows out, and put on a small poultice soaked in water, and press upon it lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so from the same vein, or another vein, or from the other arm.
The vein on the arm is bled in place of the head vein because it is composed appropriately.
And the method of healing is that the patient immerses his hand in hot water until the phlebitis becomes red;
Then bind moderately so that the vein is well compressed, now apply the salve across it, not along its breadth or length;
And let the puncture be wide, and apply salves well near the joint of the hand, and if blood does not flow freely, then immerse the hand in warm water, and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have enough;
And if it is winter, do not immerse the hand in warm water, for it is more appropriate to do so in summer than in winter;
And the salve for this vein is safer than for all other veins, as there are no artery or nerve near it.
The salivation of the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
strain the hand, and put it in hot water until the veins swell, as one can see; and if the salivation goes sideways, and if you cover it entirely, then nothing will be harmed;
and do not go too deeply, for the nerves are completely bare of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water if the salivation is frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
And when you have drawn as much blood as is necessary, apply oil and thread to quickly close the vein, and do this for each incision.
The treatment of the left hand vein is effective for diseases of the spleen, and do it exactly as I have told you for the right.
The salve of the sophene is worth for all diseases that are below the body, such as disorders of the legs, and retention of urine, and disease of the thighs, and of the old hips, and similar diseases.
And the quality of this salivation is that the patient places their foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it bursts, and ties above the ankle joint; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many veins;
treat then the widest vein, at the ankle, for it is worth more.
And if you treat it above the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below, and treat it across as if cutting through.
and let the flame be extinguished.
And if the blood cannot come out, then reset the foot to its proper position, and let the vein be thoroughly opened.
And if the treatment fails the first time, then begin again slightly above it the second time, for the place is salty;
do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the vein of the other foot equally.
The site of the sciatic vein is at the ankle on the inside, and its incision relieves hip pain when it is due to hot blood.
And the qualities of its treatment are such that the patient enters the bath, and applies IV fingers above the ankle in twisting, because otherwise the vein does not appear.
and if it appears, then heal it in all ways that you can, and by crossing. and it is better that you cut it, for the place is below, and it responds well to many people.
and it is better that you cut it, for the place is below, and it responds well to many people. And if you do not find it, then heal any line that appears on the back of the foot and near the little toe, and be careful of the nerves;
and let the blood flow as much as you wish, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it; She is now healed.
Suction cups are made of horns, or wool, or glass;
and suction is performed according to two methods: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
And this suction that does not involve striking is according to two methods: either it is done with heat, or without heat;
and the suction that is performed by striking and extracting blood is done at fourteen points on the body, of which one is entirely on the head; and the other [dislocation] is in the neck; and two others on both sides of the neck; and the windpipe behind the chin; and the windpipe of both shoulders; and the windpipe above the buttocks; and the windpipes within both arms; and the windpipes of both legs; and the windpipes of both ankles;
and the windpipe treatment does not draw blood, except from small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken a person as does bleeding from a vein; And it is not appropriate that it be treated, nor with any fire or sense of heat, in any illness that comes from overfullness, until the entire body is emptied.
And if due to the necessity of illness it is necessary to bleed, or by habit, we shall perform it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and both in these times and throughout each period;
for there are those who, when they need to be bled, have a heavy head;
and there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and are spitting blood; and there are some who dream, and see in their sleep blood and wounds and deaths and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we instruct them to bleed after three hours of the day.
The treatment of the brain helps with the stiffness of the head... that affects the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of the entire body;
and this ventilation is in place of the treatment of the head, and it is not suitable for those with a cold complexion to use, or who have catarrh, as it causes them great harm;
and for those reasons, it is not suitable for the elderly to use, nor for those who have cold diseases in their head;
And those who recover from it frequently become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping vessel a bit lower due to the risk of forgetfulness.
The ventosity is located at the nape of the neck and below the occipital bone, and for this reason it is useful for constriction of the stomach, and for splitting the channel of the groin, and for all purposes, and for distension;
and here it is necessary to apply pressure, because if it holds too tightly, it causes obstruction in the stomach and heart.
The ventosations at the second vertebra of the neck are useful for headaches, and for ophthalmic pain and migraine, and for choking, and for pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is located at the nape of the neck;
and you should instruct the patient to press gently without pressing on the artery, and to avoid bleeding.
The ventilation below the chin is beneficial for mouth diseases, and for the corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the sinuses below the two lips.
The ventosation of the shoulders is useful for diseases that come from heat and swelling.
The ventilation of the axilla is as valuable as that of the three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the area is bare of flesh, and it lies near nerves and arteries.
The ventilation on the buttocks is effective for hemorrhoids of the anus and for diseases below it; the cup should be large and made of brass, requiring good suction. and by chance, if they were delicate, they would break; and make large wounds.
The suction cups on the legs provide strong relief because they draw blood from the entire body, and they are effective for old pains in the thighs, and of the back, and of the bladder, and reset the flowers;
and they are placed at the two shoulder joints, and the two ankles, and overall they weaken the body after long use, and cause fainting in many conditions.
The method of applying the suction cup is to place it first empty, and then suck gently, and attach it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this, until you see the area red and swollen, and feel the heat of the blood;
Then heat it, and apply cupping vessels, and be careful with the condition of the body, for there are those who have thin flesh, and clear pores: It is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide incisions, and somewhat deep; and suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to open the pathway for thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time;
and when we want to let blood little by little, we strike only once. And if we lose a lot of blood, we often replenish it;
and if the blood is thick, pierce it forcefully, and ensure that the incision is such that the heart perceives it suddenly, and for those who have thick and hard skin and small pores, you should anoint the wounds with oil that is stimulating and dispersing: if it is available, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in spring, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
And if the excess substances are thick and cold, use bitter oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar.
And if the person being treated has tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied, but after the suction, they should be washed with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain berry water, or similar.
And those who have much moisture, let them rise from a decoction of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses should rise from old wine, or juice of suc (honey water), or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar ones;
And it is not appropriate to use cupping before a bath or in a bath, but after the bath for one hour or two;
And do not let them sleep after cupping, and it is necessary for them to walk around when they should be cupped and when they have been cupped.
And be wary if the person who is being treated is choleric, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed; then it is necessary for them to take cold things, such as pomegranates and endive and lettuce grown in the shade, and similar things; and drink pigeon soup, and eat turtle meat, and moist meats.
and drink pigeon soup, and eat turtle meat, and moist meats. And he who has a cold constitution should take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and eat porridge, and eat thrushes and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day that he will be bled, he should drink more than eat;
and one should give some men occasionally trocar or nutmeg before bleeding, or after, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be thin, but it is not appropriate for those who are hot to drink it.
The cupping glasses that are applied without cutting are those placed over the liver, and over the spleen, and for gout, and on the abdomen and buttocks and thighs and hip, because these members do not tolerate cutting, and we only use them to draw blood from one part of the body to another, as we place them on the breasts when a child is sick;
To remove the viscosity which is in the limb, as we place suction cups on the abdomen and on the neck to reduce the swelling of the limb;
and it removes the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power it may remove the obstruction, or dislodge the stone from its place;
and it does this when applied to the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with heat, and at other times filled with hot water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in such a manner that the suction cup is filled with warm water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
The form of the cupping vessel administered with fire is as follows:
And let it be two fingers wide and half a palm long, and let there be a small hole in the center, as for threading a needle, and it should be of iron, underneath so that it does not scratch the patient when placed on the limb;
and let there be across the center an iron or steel bar, to hold a candle securely, and let there be both large and small ones according to the illnesses and age of those who use them;
for the suction cups for children are different from those for the elderly, and for the thin compared to the fat.
And one should place this suction cup on the limb as follows:
Take the candle of wax or linen, and place it inside the cupping vessel across from the shaft that is in the cupping vessel, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping vessel so it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and hold your two fingers over the opening we mentioned, so that when you want to, the steam goes out, and then remove the cupping vessel;
and apply the dressing as before, and repeat it often if you need to.
In the cupping vessel used for treating pleurisy, there is no shaft or opening, and it is not applied except when it is full of fluid, and it is placed on the limb solely for that purpose;
and this is the form:
Sandwiches are not applied except to members where cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as the lips and gums, and similar places; and on bare flesh areas such as the back or buttocks, and other similar places;
and the quality of the use is that when you find sandwiches in mild conditions that are clear and suitable for treatment, take them;
and place them in mild water until they become accustomed, and have nothing in their stomachs; and then bleed and cup the affected area, then rub the limb until it turns red, and apply the sandwiches;
and when they are full, and fall off, if it is a place where one can apply cups, then apply them, for this is very useful afterwards.
If not, then lift the area with ease, and then with water, very well, and then apply pressure;
and if the swelling persists near the veins, moisten a cloth of linen in cold water and apply it, until the vein is relieved;
and if the vein is swollen, then apply powdered vitriol, or gall nuts, and similar things, until it is relieved;
and you place half of peeled beans on the area, and leave them until they heat up in that spot, it will now be alleviated;
And if you need more, take other veins.
And if the veins do not want to be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or insert a needle until the blood flows, and then apply them, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will harden;
and when you see that they fall off, sprinkle a bit of aloes and frankincense powder, or ash, so they will now adhere.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Beware, foolish physician, that they throw themselves into this chapter, having never read any ancient books or letters about it;
and for this reason the science is strange in our land, because I have never found any good one;
and I know nothing of it except through the knowledge of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have acquired understanding, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained within it, and I have summarized at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I have done in these two preceding chapters.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the main points of discourse and the chapters where the wise one applies his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain occurs to someone, you must hurry to treat the patient from both sides if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of body, children, or elderly; or if the time is not very warm, or too cold;
And eat cold things, that is to say cold joints, and meat of birds and kids, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no fear of a hot abscess or spreading matter in the limb;
If the patient returns to a better condition than he had used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that promote thick and sticky healing, such as boiled wheat in water, rice, headcheese, feet, pork belly, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things. For such nourishment promotes healing and the broken bones heal more quickly.
And know that the bones broken of old and infirm people cannot be well set or mended according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor can those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but do not worry, reset the broken bone with thick bandages that hold and join the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before; And do not exhaust him of his strength, and for this reason it is necessary to feed him on coarse meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the hip, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes along the grain, and another across it, like the shaft of a writing quill.
For there is a fracture that goes along the grain, and another across it, like the shaft of a writing quill. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with just a small crack.
And for each method, let there be its own instrument, and its proper equipment in the restoration, according to what memory brings forth.
and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the limb is twisted, and it is clearly apparent by its displacement, and sounds hollow to the touch.
and when there is no twisting or sound upon pressing, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
but it may still have twisting, or cracking, or small fractures. It is not necessary to move it by hand, but apply the medicines that follow hereafter, and then gently press it now.
And you should know that for the fracture that goes into the marrow, and where the two parts are dislocated, they must now be set evenly so that healing splints may be applied.
and if healing splints are applied, leave them on for some days until the swelling is reduced.
then place it evenly to the mold that you can gently and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is easier than that where there are fragments.
then secure it as needed subsequently.
And if the bone is fractured into pieces, bind it from two parts, whether it is an arm or leg, or with your hand for smaller members, or with two bands, or with one band and your hand.
And place the limb according to its natural form, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, reset all the fragments in their places as much as you can, and ensure that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
And properly align the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not right:
if you set it properly, and do not pull it too tightly, nor press so much as those who cause heat and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is properly set, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and ensure carefully that the limb is so secure that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels any pain, it is not properly set, and it must be placed in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
and ensure carefully that the limb is so secure that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels any pain, it is not properly set, and it must be placed in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and ensure that it is placed correctly so that no curvature occurs when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and thumbs and similar: it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths; and those who are thick, such as thigh and leg:
it is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide straps embrace the entire large limb, and compress it equally from all sides, so there are no gaps;
then tie around light rollers, three times or four according to the limb, and press your hand slightly on the entire bandage, then go above the break and compress it less so that the break can move a little;
and gradually loosen the bandage little by little until you cover most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap it again above the broken area;
Then return to the part on the side of the fracture and compress it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first chapter above;
Then place linen or cloths between the bandages so that they are all even, then wrap everything with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place hot poultices that reduce the abscess and alleviate the swelling, and leave it like this for several days;
then bind over your splints, and they should be half the width of a palm, made carefully from hazelwood or the wood used for skewers, or palm ribs, and should follow this shape:
but it is necessary that the splint which one places on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others;
and it should be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large; then press against the splints as you did in the first hour, then bind it with bandages, just as on the fracture in the first hour; tighter above, looser below;
and the bandages should be medium thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;
for if the bandages are too thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who use twisted linen cords for their bindings, and this is a great error, because the binding cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two fingers' width between each splint.
And if the patient is pierced by the points of the stars after being bound in their beds, place below them linen plugs, or wool rags, so that they do not become entangled.
When the wound is with the splinter, and the skin is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
And you should know that it is not appropriate to extract all the splinters from broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, one should not put on splints before five days or seven, or more according to your experience with a hot abscess ensuing.
and see here the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
and take flour that is kept near the mill walls, and mix it abundantly with eggs, and apply this preparation, not too thick or too thin, and use it, and this is the common method of a plaster restoring fractures in many cases, especially for women and children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of a plaster restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take ten drams of aloes wood and styrax and anise and spikenard and gum arabic and mastic, mix them together. Take five drams of myrrh and aloes. Take nine drams of alecost. and make it into powder, and mix it with the yolk of an egg; If the person's constitution is hot, use this plaster, for it is well composed, and quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Another method of plaster for treating sprains: Take mugwort and viper's bugloss, one handful each; take myrrh and aloes, one pound each; take acetum, six pounds; take Armenian bole ten pounds, and grind well, and mix with water or egg white, and administer.
Another method for plasters for joints and bones out of place, to alleviate the pain that occurs, and for wear on the bone, and fractures: take new wool, and boil it in lard and oil, and apply to the affected area.
This plaster does not heal, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and properly alleviates the pain.
Another way of applying a plaster to restore broken bones: take dried mulberry leaves and herb leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of a broken bone and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of mallows, chamomile, violets flowers, flour of oats, of each one part;
and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water, or just water, and use it.
Another way to make a plaster stronger than the first one, when a hard abscess comes during the restoration of the limb. Take roots of mallows, and seeds of flax, almond, honey locust, and spurge, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates states in his book that one should not place anything on a broken limb to restore strength except for plaster made of wax and oil, and nothing more, and he says it should be neither too hard nor too soft.
And Galen seems to suggest that for a broken limb, one should place dry and slightly warm things on it to restore strength, such as myrrh, aloes, and incense, and similar items, as we have said.
Another method of plaster for injury and pain: take mutton and human fat, or bird feathers, and vervain, and mix equally, and grind them, and make a plaster and apply it.
And then loosen it a little after, and be careful if the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not loosen it by hand for days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry, and loosen it, and remove the plaster now;
and take a light cloth, and a sponge soaked in sea water, and dip it in water, and apply it to the area until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour, then place dry wool soaked in water or rose oil on it, and bind it with a bandage until you are sure of a hot abscess;
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the gentle treatment, and a little plaster, and do not strain it as strongly as before; and gently until he is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is red and swollen and painful and inflamed are gone from all over, and you need ointment and linen, then restart it as you did first equally.
And if the limb shows no sign of what we have said, do not dislocate it before three days or four or five or seven. and sometimes leave it for twenty days, depending on what is observed, until the break heals, and the bones come closer together.
then restrain it more than before, and increase its flesh, as I said before;
and if you see the area dry more than necessary, know that no new flesh can come there; then apply warm water compresses every time you dislocate it, and do this every third day, and loosen the bandage a little;
By this work then correct the nourishment to the limb, and quickly mend what those foolish doctors do, who abruptly reset the limb:
It is wrong, and such work is fearful, and I see nothing else but to leave it and do it properly.
There are many kinds of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
for there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the force removes all the bone up to the surface beneath it, as if splitting wood or a staff; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called a "splitting" or "chopping.
When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute";
and the wound from these two fractures is large or small.
And if there is an embedded impact, or split by the neck of a stone, or falling on a stone, or other similar circumstances.
And if there is a break that approaches the membrane beneath the bone, whether it is on top of the bone or near it, and this wound is either large or small.
And there is a wound that is set in the bone as fine as a hair, and this crack is small, and for this reason it is called a "hairline" fracture;
and there is a wound made by being hit by a stone, or by falling, or similar things, which causes a bone fragment to enter below, and the place is covered with hair as blacksmiths do when they hammer on their forge; and a stone enters inside.
And this happens more often to those who have soft bones in their head, such as children's heads;
and in all these types of fractures, small fragments may become displaced as they do; and I will speak about it in its place.
And we recognize all manners of fractures by the depression above them, and by probing with probes, and by the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The hair-like appearance is recognized when, after uncovering the bone, one rubs along it, and the fracture appears clearly black.
In the treatment of the fracture, be wary of any adverse effects on the patient, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, convulsions, paralysis, fever, and the eyes protruding and reddening, and other similar conditions in many circumstances, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any alarming signs, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounded person first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can do so.
And if it is in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the skin under the bone does not rot, and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the affected part as follows:
and it is that you take the head of the patient carefully, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and around the shape of the wound as deeply as you can, and if blood vessels bleed upon exposing the bone, or an abscess forms, use appropriate assistance, and fill the area with cloths soaked in rose oil; and allow the wound to rest until the swelling subsides, and be assured of no further bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to two methods of work:
one method is that you cut closely around the incision, and this is the form:
And then make the second cut larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron.
and work gently so that you do not bleed the head.
And if the bone is hard and protruding, it is necessary that you pierce around it, thus administering incisions with files, not deeply enough to penetrate further into the skull bone, and it should have above the tip a margin or circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone;
And you must have several of them, so that each comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have splinters for all parts of the head;
And this is the form of the three kinds of splinters:
To pierce around a broken bone, place one splinter on the bone and turn it until you know that the bone is pierced;
then place the splinter slightly further along, and do this all around, then cut with your incising tools the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this as carefully and gently as we have said, until you draw out the bone either by hand or with any of the instruments you have such as forceps, pincers;
And guard that you do not touch the brain or the cerebellum.
And when you have pierced the bone, and drawn it out, then you must use an instrument that is prepared from the bone to all other similar instruments, resembling a scalpel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than other scalpels;
and if anything remains of the small bones or any scales, then remove them gently with the instruments; then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of work is that which Galen described, which is more skillful; and he praises it very much, and this is his word. It is necessary first to expose a part of the bone where the fracture opens up, so that when you have uncovered this part, you place below the head of this chisel, which has this shape:
And do not cut from one side, and the part to be cut is arched on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then tap lightly with a small mallet on top, so that you gently cut around the bone all around, and take great care of the skin below;
if it is adhered to the bone, remove it gently, for it must be removed without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the membrane, and the bone is broken only slightly from above, with small pieces present, then it is necessary behind that roughness, to remove the scales with a fine scraper which you must have in various quantities, to administer at each place what is most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Start with large scrapers and then use finer ones, and do not stop using them until it is well done.
In each of the other hair-like incisions and subtle fractures, you must manage them according to their direction;
And it is something that is not answered by one who has devoted his study to this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, then you should take a piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another piece of doubled linen, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first layer of linen; and apply this as lightly as you can so that you do not burden the wound, then administer another layer over it, and do not pull it too tight but just enough to cover the wound;
and leave it thus for one or two days until the swelling is reduced, then release it, and administer medicines such as root of lily, and flour of vetches, and powder of incense, and aristology, and similar things;
and from these things make powder, and apply it to the wound, and immediately administer cleansing medicines without caustic substances;
and ensure that the wound is immediately clean, do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow pus to accumulate, because when pus accumulates on the cloth of the brain, it can lead to corruption and putrefaction, causing great harm to the patient;
for when something caustic is applied to the surface, it must be covered with another layer. Therefore, take care if any harmful accidents happen to the patient, as we have said, it is uncertain without doubt.
And if blackness comes not from anything other than the medicine that you have put on it, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and add a little glue, and apply this mixture to it. then treat it according to the appropriate methods until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the skull above can be broken, or just one part, because these are two bones;
and the one below is made of cartilage and does not break, but can be pushed out of place or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should insert your small finger into the opening of the skull, and align that fracture with your finger inside, and outside with a pad, until the skull returns to its natural shape; And do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and your rod cannot reach that place, then you must place it equally on top of a slightly thickened rail.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do likewise, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can.
unless, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then apply to the head of the neck cloths of linen if the fracture is in one part.
And you apply another on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the cloths be thick enough to fill the openings of the neck.
And some practitioners say that the tents should be moistened with butter, and changed each day. It does not seem right to me, but they must be moistened in a mixture of egg whites and flour powder; then leave it covered until the bone is hard and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes one inserts goose feathers instead of bandages, and if there is a small cloth around it, it holds the dressing, and the patient blows through them; or do as you wish.
And if pus comes from abscesses in the nose while you are treating them, apply cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or a little bit of myrrh.
And if pus does not come out, apply a plaster from the outside made of sesamum flour and powdered incense, mixed with egg whites, then put on light plugs, and do not bind the nose;
And if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract with suitable instruments, then sew the wound, and treat flesh wounds, and sealing, such as plasters and suitable ointments;
And if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tampons, and place strips of cloth, until it is healed.
When the jaw is fractured from the side, and there is no wound to exit, and the fracture is only inside, not broken into two parts but rather cracked internally, one can easily recognize it.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you place your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then place your index finger of the right hand, and gently push the fracture inwards, and support it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
And if the jaw fracture is displaced in two parts, you must administer an extension to both sides until they are equal.
And if the movement or fracture of the teeth occurs, hold them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then place wax on the broken jaw, and put on two cloths; and place on the cloth a large splint well made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and secure it as much as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the face changes shape, then loosen it on the third day, and then adjust what has changed. and apply a plaster on top, made from powder of the mill with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the wax.
and put on a poultice of light wool, and if the poultices adhere, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until they are healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if large abscesses come, then treat them as we have said many times.
And if there is both a fracture and a wound, check if any piece of the bone has been removed; and carefully remove it with appropriate instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, then stitch the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable plasters to it, to promote flesh growth until it is healed.
The collarbone is often fractured multiple times near the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
where it is broken and separated into two pieces, with fragments, and this is the easiest to restore;
Where there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is such that when there is a fracture without a wound, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the bone is broken; and the other extends the arm towards the part.
Then place the fracture between your hands so that its form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or sign of displacement.
And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth, or wool, and let it be as thick as necessary; and extend and lift the limb, and hold the ball with your hand so that you can place the fracture evenly as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the humerus out due to its position, then the patient should lie on their side and place a medium-sized pillow under the armpit, and have the assistant push down on the shoulder until the bone of the humerus is raised.
And then align the fracture with your hands, and if you find it shattered, you must cut into it;
and gently pull the pieces apart, and if the bone cannot join due to any prominence, cut it with one of your incisors; but place the forceps away from this instrument to protect the surface;
and it appears like a spoon, and is not jagged, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
and it should have two heads, as you see, and one wide, and the other narrow, like the outline of the wound you made when you treated the bones;
And when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound open, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it being a hot abscess, cover the wound with cloths and tents according to its size.
And if abscesses come, wet the cloth in rose oil and honey and vinegar, and apply it.
The binding of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster made from powder from the mill and an egg white, and place light dressings over it, and place a pad under the splint if you need to. Then take a very wide bandage one palm wide, then place a double cloth over the dressings, and the plaster. Then take a slender stick three digits wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down. and place the splint on the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy shoulder blade, and under the affected shoulder blade; and realign each part, and when you see that the ligaments hold the fracture in place, and clearly see that the splint does not move off the broken bone, then examine it every day, and when the ligaments loosen, restrain them;
and have the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder blade while they sleep, to lift the shoulder up; this will ease the fracture of the collarbone by lifting the shoulder, where you bind the arm to the neck, and do not undo it unless a bad accident occurs, until twenty days;
Then reapply the plaster if you see that it is necessary, and bind it in this way until it is restored.
and it is restored within twenty-eight days, and in fewer days for some people.
of the fracture of the shoulder
It often happens that the shoulder is broken either widely or in the middle, and one can only know this by touching it.
treat it according to the shape of the break and reset it according to its natural form in all ways that you can.
then place powder from the mill with an abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put on one double layer of cloth. Then place a splint wide and thin, a bit wider than the shoulder, and if the splint presses on any part of the shoulder, pad that area with linen cotton so that the splint rests evenly;
and then tightly secure it with a large bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the binding each day;
and each time it loosens, tighten it again, and adjust the splint if it has moved from its place, and have the patient lie on their side;
and the shoulder should be immobilized for twenty or twenty-five days.
And when this number of days is completed, then release it, and be careful, for it is not bone that will return to place easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes and points away from the heart, they cut it off, and do as we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to ease a hot abscess.
of the fracture of the foot
The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the ends.
And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines to one side, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks appetite, and sweats, and perhaps vomits blood, and the movement of the bones can be felt clearly through the skin.
And the restoration is as follows: the patient lies on their back, and a cushion is placed between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and bring together the ribs of both sides with your hands, and gently align in all ways possible, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then apply plasters and wads of fine salt, or some other light material, and wrap it in a cloth, securing it over the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage tightly to the back, and tighten it gradually, and check each hour the bandage, and if it loosens, then tighten it;
and if it is necessary to loosen it for corrosion or itching that comes in the area, or pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and address whatever has come from methods of treatment;
then reapply the plaster, and tighten it until it is secure.
Of the fracture of the ribs
Know that the breakage of ribs comes rarely except from heavy blows to the back, and at the front towards the chest, and they do not bend easily because they are slippery; and one feels well at the inquiry of both.
And the restoration is such that you place it equal to the fracture, as is necessary. And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a splint if you need to.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inwardly displaced, the patient feels great pain and stabbing, as with pneumonia, because the bone pierces the tissue; and he coughs up blood clots, and vomits a lot of blood, and this is a serious condition, and the elderly are more prone to it.
And there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push out the bruise from within.
We do not do this so that abscesses do not occur there if they have not already come. And if they have occurred, then heal them.
And some say to place suction cups over the area, to draw out forcefully, and this seems reasonable; still, there is concern that the suction cups may not draw out the excesses to the site due to the condition of weakness.
And some say to cover the area with wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the application even around, then proceed with the treatment for pleurisy, of food and medication.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone piercing the tissue, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the area of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument underneath to protect the surface.
And then one must cut the bone, and gently pull it apart, and then sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if small abscesses come, place cloths soaked in rose oil on the area.
and treat the area as needed for the abscess, and let them lie on their side where it is necessary, until they are healed.
and also to the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be well or not, observe if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when they are pinched and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the patient can be treated, if proper care is applied.
And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is sound or not, observe if the feet are weakened, and if the symptoms that indicate paralysis are present, and on the back there is swelling and involuntary evacuation;
and when it has been pressed upon its abdomen, there is involuntary evacuation. And when he is lying on his back and wishes to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is deadly: do not attempt to treat it.
And if these accidents do not occur to him, then the matter is lighter.
And the treatment is that you should apply heat if there is a hot abscess, and place on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil until it subsides;
then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
And if any bone breaks, it must be set immediately; and remove the bone, then sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until he is healed;
And if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the humerus," place your thumb from your left hand inside it as far as possible, then equal to the other hand's power, then apply the poultice and the bandage if you need them;
then compress it, and if there are displaced bones, cut them out, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the hip bone
It sometimes happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, there should be a slight reduction in the head. And it extends long, and inclines inward, causing the patient pain at the site, and swelling where it is broken.
And the restoration is such that you extend your hand upon it, until you are on the fracture; and feel where the fracture is and its shape;
and if the fracture is only at the head, then set it equally so that it has a natural shape.
And if the fracture is lengthwise, where it inclines inward, make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture is prepared. And when you have set it equal, then apply a poultice, then place a stick or board over it and bind the fracture so that it does not move;
and pad the area under the ribs until the sides are even. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
And if swelling comes, do not touch it, until the swelling is reduced, and then apply what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and compress it as is appropriate, if there is no harmful incident;
of the fracture of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is what is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored according to one of the two methods:
one of which is that you take one staff filled with thick paste, in this form:
And tie the two heads with two ropes, and pull them up, and seat the patient on a chair;
then place the injured arm on the staff, up to the armpit, and have it curved within the staff, then pull upwards with some heavy object or have the assistant pull downward;
Then place the splint equal to his hands together, so that the splint returns as it should.
And the other method is that you suspend the patient by his healthy side, and tie one hand to his neck, then command two ministers that one hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other hold below at the entire band, and stretch each to their part.
And if you wish for the extraction to be stronger, then remove the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the tendons on its side.
And if the splint is near the top of the shoulder, then you should place one band underneath the armpit, and the other towards the side, under the splint;
and similarly if the splint is towards the side, place one band lightly, without effort, so that the splint is even in position, and on the side;
Then place the splint evenly as it should be, and secure it, if no abscesses occur.
And if abscesses occur, do not secure it for seven days, and place damp linen in a clean area with rose oil, until the abscesses are eased;
Then it is held in place, and the method of holding it in place is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then bring the arm up to the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or over the chest;
and apply the bandage, and secure it to the shoulder and arm so that the arm is in a stable position, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has not moved back into place.
And if you doubt that the bone will move back into place, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have one thumb's width between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it extends three thumbs' widths on either side of the fracture;
Then press on the stars, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about fractures, more forcefully and without moving them apart.
And if you see the position of the bones and their compression as we have said, when you restore the broken limb, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said;
then check the bandage every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur at the site where healing cannot take place because it is too tight. If he is treated as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, do not remove the bandage before three days or more, and have the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach;
and place under the shoulder a cushion filled evenly with wool, and check each hour of day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not change, nor be softened the ligaments;
if it is directed by the power of medicine, and give him the meat that we mentioned before, in such a way that the meat at first is finely prepared; and when he begins to recover, then let it be more substantial.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be reset in forty days total; and then it must be loosened and administered baths and ointment medicines to heal the area;
And if the constriction is tight and stuck, then wait one day or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "humerus", of which one is small, and it is the one that contains the socket;
and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger;
by chance, the large humerus may be broken alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small humerus is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, the healing is difficult, and worse than when they are both broken together.
If it is the small phalanx that is merely broken, then it should be gently extended and placed evenly.
And if it is the large abscess, then it must be squeezed more firmly;
and place it on the cushion, and raise the poultice of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the other two, and let the patient lie crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him raised, so that the patient does not suffer any labor;
then extend the minister's arm to the side of his hand, or at the joint, and another minister on the other side above.
And then place the bone evenly, according to its best form.
And if there are pieces in the fracture, place each one in its place, and if any are displaced causing pain to the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut it out as we have said before.
And if with the probe for wounds, I have spoken of it in the separate chapter; then take the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration abscesses occur, then apply a bandage made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and apply the bandage gently, until the small abscesses are alleviated.
And then remove the wax, and apply a poultice made from powdered miller's flour with an abundance of egg whites, and place the bandages, with the one at the wound site being firmer and slightly wider than the others;
and note that there should be six bandages on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or in two;
and hold it tighter near the fracture than elsewhere, and gradually less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
and let the bandages on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread used for stitching be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And examine the limb and its joint after several days. And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must sprinkle the limb with warm water until the itching is relieved;
and let the limb rest without being too tightly bound.
And then restart the compression, and if the joint is weakened and the bone dislocated, and similar things, address them.
And be careful if the swelling cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must loosen it a bit, and leave it like this for several days until the swelling flows there, and then compress it.
And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, do not dislocate until twenty days.
When you examine around, then place his hands on his neck, and let his necks be even, and guard against movement and shaking, and sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and sometimes in twenty days, according to the composition and the strengths of the humors.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and the sides there are few fractures, and it rarely happens that they become dislocated many times.
And when the palm of the hand is fractured or bent, then it is necessary for the patient to sit cross-legged and sit upright facing forward evenly;
then place his hand on the extended cloth, and the attendants extend the broken bones, and align them evenly, until they are properly joined;
and apply the plaster and bandages, if no abscess forms, then place a splint according to the size of the area; and wrap it in a piece of linen cloth.
And if the fracture is in the middle of the sole of the foot, make a pad of cloth and instruct the patient to bind it tightly to their fractured sole; and then bind it with a long strip of cloth, and make the splint as thick as the palm of a hand, and secure it as is appropriate.
And if the break is on the side, then you should place a support above and another below the sole of the foot, so that the hand remains open and straight, then bind it quickly around the hand, and secure the binding between the two.
And if the fracture occurs in one of the bones on either side, especially if it is a toe bone, place it evenly as is appropriate; and you press it with the palm, and if you wish place a small straight splinter to lift the fracture, and it does not move;
and if the fracture is on one of the others, such as in the index finger or one of the others, set it straight and bind it with the healthy finger next to it; bind them all together, which is better, or place a splint on them, like on a box;
and be careful in the restoration and disposition of a hot abscess, and support those who come to it, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often fractured, and it can be seen well when it turns forward and backward;
And the restoration is such that one binds a bandage above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on their back, then each helper extends their bandage equally on their side;
and this is when the fracture is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one of the bandages should be towards the groin, and the other bandages below the break.
And if it is near the knee, then the bandage should be near the knee, and the extension below;
then the physician should align the bone equally with both hands, until it is in its natural position, and then apply a plaster, and bind it, so that abscesses do not occur.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside before you return to your work and treatment; the ligature is made in such a manner.
You should wrap around the fracture one bandage doubled in two or three layers, and leave out the excess, then turn the leg until the heels align with the root of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, with the ends of the thread above.
then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
Then place a piece of cloth between the thigh and the calf to evenly distribute the pressure, then begin to bind tightly three times or four above the fracture; and as you go further up from the fracture, the binding should be less tight;
then take the two ends of the thread that you placed between the thigh and the calf, and bind three rounds above them, then go back under to the head of the thread until you reach the foot;
and bind it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it as is, so that no abscess or swelling occurs. And if it does occur, then loosen it and address what happens, as we have said many times;
and if there are bone fragments that cause pain, they must be removed, if possible; and if it cannot be done, it is necessary to cut the area and draw out the pus; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is fractured in such a way that splints must be applied, as with the shoulder and arm;
nevertheless, the patient will not suffer harm in such restoration.
And know that the thigh is restored in 21 days, or a few less or more, depending on the differences in temperaments.
Know that in the groove of the knee there is often a slight fracture, but it bends many times.
And if it fractures, it is merely a crack or hole, and it becomes like any other wound, and this is felt very well.
And the restoration is such that one sets even those who have bent knees, until they are joined as much as possible;
Then apply the plaster, and place a round splinter if you need to, and bind it as is appropriate, then check all the preparations we have mentioned for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions; Then apply what is appropriate to each condition until he is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is properly called "mustel," and the other is called "foscile";
and any other fracture that occurs in the arm is treated similarly to how the leg is treated, and the work is done accordingly. And if both bones are broken together, then treat the leg from all sides.
And if the small bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly; and turn away from it.
Then treat with extension, and place it evenly, and bind the splints equally;
but still, if the break is severe and there are multiple pieces, the extension should be gentler and lighter; and proceed according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two bundles of wood to wrap around the leg from both sides, and let them run along the length of the leg from the knee down;
Then wrap with two layers one bandage above and below, and place it in the middle as well, so that at this point the leg cannot turn to either side, and thus it is secure;
and some administer one splint along the length of the leg, and if it is wooden, they place it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done this is used in fractures where there is an open wound;
and move the leg each day to check for any abscess or other complication; treat it until it is healed.
of the fracture of the foot bones
At the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and at the two joints, and it happens that it breaks in various conditions.
And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones overlapping each other, place the patient's foot on the ground as if they were to walk, and then now put your foot on top of theirs where the bones are raised, and then press them until they return to their proper places;
Then apply the plaster and plugs over it, and place under the belly of the foot a small tablet filled with two spoonfuls, then bind it tightly to the foot after wrapping it with cloths, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two is broken, repair them as we have said about the two of the hand; Then place a splint on the broken toe according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then place under the foot the tablet that I mentioned, and bind it tightly;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken toes, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen cloth, and bind the tablet under the foot; And let it stand on top of the table to expose the belly of the foot so that it is well covered.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said to the other surgeons, as we have mentioned; and treat each case as is appropriate.
of the fracture of the bone of the thumb
When the bone of the woman's pelvis is fractured, make her sit with her legs spread, then lean her towards the part of the back, and hold her from behind;
then fill the area of the woman's pelvis with cotton, and place there pieces as thick as a finger;
then help the woman stand up, and lift her back little by little, and then push the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the pelvis, and return the bone with the padding;
and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or around that time: the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie a tube to the opening, and insert the entire bladder into the body; then blow firmly into the tube until the bladder is inflated inside: the body will return the fracture to its proper place;
then fill it with cotton, and leave it like this for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the thigh bone;
and these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who puts his study and practice into them, and my book becomes understood.
For the fracture signifies in various positions the right way of restoration: understand then.
In the shaft, when it is fractured, take a goose quill and insert the shaft; then wrap strips around it, and leave it for three days or until the swelling subsides, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be treated immediately, so that the treatments we have mentioned bear witness.
And if the wound heals, then cauterize it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then resume restoring the fracture at the same hour, or on that day, unless abscesses come.
And if abscesses come, then cease the restoration until a new day, until the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it even on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harmful accidents.
And if the broken bone is apparent on the exposed chest, then it must be set gently with your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extension is not available to match your hands, then use this iron instrument which is seven or eight fingers long, and its width corresponds to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the physician to apply three or four, according to what may be needed in each treatment of fracture;
and let it be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend under the pressure on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", for which the curved head should be placed on the top of the visible bone; and push it in at once, until it fits, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone until the instrument has sufficient grip.
And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, then cut off part of it with an appropriate instrument, whether an incisor or saw, to your ability;
Then raise that which is embedded in the bone of hardness and small splinters.
And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Place it back in its proper place, then moisten the dressing with black styptic wine, and if it is inflamed, clean it properly. and do not apply cerate or anything else with oil to the wound, as it may cause putrefaction and corruption;
then apply bandages after you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around according to the size of the wound, taking care that the dressing does not compress the wound with the fracture;
and many times foolish doctors have done this, causing the patient to die or be corroded at times; And let the bandaging be looser and lower than for other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that harm may come as we have said, and there is pain in the area, then you should not place anything on it. but wrap it instead with hard cloths and bind them in place.
And when you see after one day or two the wound begin to swell, remove what you have put on with all wine, and apply healing salve, such as tetratripapharmakon and similar.
And it is necessary that you loosen the member twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the swelling runs down gently.
And if many days pass and it cannot heal but continues to swell, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must probe the wound with a probe, and remove all these displaced fragments that cause the pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
And when the bone is broken and protruding through the limb, such as in the thigh or shoulder bones, and other similar large bones, do not attempt to pull it out, for many times this leads to death, but leave it until it heals.
by chance it will fall out after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can.
and if you cannot, leave it as it is.
We often see this after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a terrible thing to behold the shape of the limb; and as a result, the limb may not be able to perform its natural functions.
Take care then if the wound is fresh: apply styptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so choose any of these things or all together, and mix them with styptic wine or egg white or oil; and place them on the knot with plugs, and bind it tightly, and do not loosen it for several days;
and place them on the knot with plugs, and bind it tightly, and do not loosen it for several days; and then dislocate it again, and start over with another one until the constriction is removed;
where you bind tightly on a well-made piece of plaster; for the property of the plaster is that it removes all the swelling from the limbs;
and if the constriction has already hardened like stone and needs to be removed, then cover it with a patch, and the excess will become evident; where you return it to a barber for removal until it is gone, and continue treatment until it is healed.
of the limb which is weak after recovery
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate afterwards, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and the limb could not receive proper nourishment; or due to excessive bleeding; or because of too many movements, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in their body, so they are weak.
And the treatment is that you should make the patient eat, and make the body soft, so that the blood increases in him; and the minister bathes him, and gives him joy and ease;
then applies pitch to the limb so that the pitch attracts the swelling, and frequently washes it with cold water until the swelling subsides; and returns to its natural form.
of the limb twisted after the sickness When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is clearly broken, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it still does not lose its natural function:
do not believe those fools who say one should break the limb anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
and these practices are blamed, and great harms come from them, and by chance death results;
nevertheless, if the knots and tortures are fresh, they should be soaked in hot water, or herbs that soften should be boiled, such as leaves of mallows, roots, hellebore, and similar things;
and make an emollient plaster, such as well-made murtl, and take the mallows mucilage, and mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply a plaster;
or take fat figs, and mash them with dried chicory root, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
And sometimes the knot is removed to rub continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And let motion be given to the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it must be cut up to the bone, with a subtle and gentle incision; and apply cautery and careful attention in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in anyone, it must now be returned without delay.
For if one delays, the swelling increases, and by chance it is reset with difficulty to its place;
for it is not appropriate to move it at the moment when it is swollen: it often causes spasms and other pains;
still, when this happens, make the patient bleed, then leave them alone until the abscesses subside;
Then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb as the treatment will come to its place.
And I have organized the chapters on dislocations from the head down to the feet.
It sometimes happens that the jaws become dislocated, and both dislocations occur in two ways: where they are slightly out of place and are somewhat relaxed; or they are completely dislocated and hang to one side, causing saliva to pour from the mouth as it cannot be contained, and the patient cannot close their mouth, and their tongue wraps around the teeth.
When the dislocation is slight, it returns on its own with proper positioning.
And if it is complete and thorough, then you must reset it quickly and do not delay;
And in such a manner that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his thumb from one of his hands at the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other hand should be moved away, to place it equally;
and instruct the patient to relax his jaws and move them in all directions. And the physician should place it evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if the resetting is difficult, especially if both jaws are involved, soak them in warm water and oil until you can reset them gently;
do not delay in resetting it, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient clots well to soften, then place moist cloths in cerate made of rose oil and wax, then bind it gently with soft bands;
and let the patient sleep on his back, and place his shoulders between two cushions, so that he does not move to either side, nor strain himself, but take light food until the pains are gone, and keep the jaws still;
and then let him eat what he wants gently, and do not force him to open his mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is well bound and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset properly in one hour, and are not returned to their places, fever often results and may become chronic, and by chance there may be vomiting of bile.
And when you see this, then you know it is a sign of impending danger; And many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.
The dislocation cannot be reset from the elbow within the continuity of the arm and leg, and it is sometimes dislocated outward, which is clearly felt.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies supine on their back, and extends their arms; and then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then apply the plaster and bandage, and secure it;
and the head that is towards the side cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it dislocates at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
then apply the plaster and bandage, and secure it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are well;
And thus likewise is reset the head of the spine when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in no more than three ways:
one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the socket on the inner side; and the second is at the part of the bottom; and occasionally it dislocates at the top part, and this happens rarely;
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inward towards the nerves;
and it often dislocates inward towards the socket, especially in those with little flesh, because for them it happens quickly;
For those who have enough flesh, it struggles to come out, and struggles to go back in.
And occasionally it happens to some men that they suffer a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And a dislocation is known when it moves towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their differences clearly evident; and you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and beneath the armpit towards the top of the shoulder, as if it were an eye socket; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move in any way;
And likewise, if it is relocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly upon touching;
And this type of dislocation is not to be returned when it is new, or if the child is sick.
And the method is that the practitioner lifts the hand of the patient above, then place your palms under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; And the practitioner lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it underneath; it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the softening and soothing plaster, such as a decoction of hellebore and fenugreek and honey-sweetened water, let it be applied;
then let the patient lie on his back, and place under him a cushion of wool neither too soft nor too hard, then have the patient place his heel on the pillow, and lift the affected shoulder gently, and pull the patient's hand;
and another attendant hold the patients head so it does not move downward; the shoulder now returns entirely, and if you wish to reset it according to this method:
and make sure there is a man present who is taller than the patient; and it should be straight towards the side, and put his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit up, so that the patient hangs down. and another minister should pull the patient's hand downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then he may carry something heavy with him, and the dislocation returns now.
And it is also reset in another manner:
and one drives a long stick into the ground, where the head should be as round as a pistol, and it should not be too thick or too thin; then place it under the patient, but ensure that he has cloth underneath, and the patient should stand against the long part of the stick;
Then extend his hand from the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return despite all the things we have said, then do this treatment: take a rod two spans long and four fingers wide, which has a rounded head to easily enter under the armpit, in this form:
then tie the head of the rod with a cloth strip so that it does not hurt the patient, then place it under the armpit of the patient;
and extend the arm over the long rod, and tie the shoulder to the rod, and the hand to the head of the rod, then place the arm on one rung of a wide ladder, with the hand extended downward, and let the body hang from the other side: The joint now revolves freely.
And when it is in place, however that may be, you must put under the seat a sphere of equal flax, then apply an ointment prepared with powdered from the mill, with incense and egg yolk over the entire shoulder and around it, then stretch it under the seat gradually, and wrap the bandage over the ointment, and embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hand remain thus.
And he should eat little until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal more quickly;
and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is hard and not softened, it is healthy.
And if the joint is loose due to moisture that has come to it, or for another reason, you must administer cauterizations with three openings as described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and after seven days it still does not heal, and the joint cannot be raised, and he cannot lift his arm, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are severed or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, is done by impulse, and extension of hands, and another place is ministered.
and care for it until it is healed.
And if after healing the limb becomes stiff and slow in movement, the patient should take many baths until the stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original condition.
of the dislocation of the elbow
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated by bones, and returns to place by bones;
and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not resolved, for one can see and feel it clearly; and dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the diseased part with the healthy part, then you can see clearly. For the joint is displaced, and he cannot bend his arm or touch his shoulder properly.
And you must reset it as abscesses often occur there, because if abscesses were to occur, it would be difficult to treat them;
and by chance cannot be completely restored, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and often leads to death.
And the restoration is such that when it can be returned to place, you should extend their arm with both your hands; and their arms should be extended, and the hands of the physician around it, from above and below, and push the joint with both palms together, or at the base of their palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and presses with the edge of the palm on the dislocated part.
And if it does not return to its place, administer strong traction;
and it is when two ministers extend the arm, and hold it two ministers so that it does not move at extension;
then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped it with a cloth long and wide;
and when the physician joins the joint to the hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then forcefully set the joint until it returns;
and when it is in place, apply dry plaister with egg white, and hold firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then unbind.
And if the joint is firm in its place, loosen the bandage and leave it;
and if you see that the joint is not tightly bound, then restart the plaster and bandage, and leave it like this for several days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if he feels stiffness after the return of the joint and it moves, bathe and rub gently, and press until it is relieved; and place a piece of fat lambs wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the wool back on, and then enter the bath; and do this two times or three, until he is healed;
and if you wish, place moist flax heated with butter on it, and apply it;
it will return to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the fingers returns easily, more so than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to return it to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, before swelling or a hot abscess occurs.
And the method of returning it is to place the affected hand on a table, and have an assistant extend the hand, and you should position your hand equally, so that your palm lies over the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns.
However, you must check if it is properly aligned; then place the patient's hand on a board for extension and return. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of his hand on the table, and the physician should place his hand upon that part of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, apply soothing plasters to the abscesses and leave it like this without repeating.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot place it back after several days, then the twisted joint will remain dislocated;
and it will not harm the patient except that the hand is weakened, and cannot grasp anything properly: Then you know that the nerves are cut, or the artery;
there is no other remedy than to constrict with a cautery near the wound, and perhaps nothing else will do.
And when it is in place, apply the plaster we have mentioned, then bind and leave for five days, then loosen and leave as such.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then moisten with warm water, and rub until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the front;
then they straighten the finger, and push the dislocation back to its sockets until it returns, then hold the head of the finger, and pull it towards the part where it is disjointed;
and leave it for two days, and then set it equal on that day;
and for the tooth as we have said, loosen it during the day, move it, and reattach it to the root;
and do this frequently until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;
and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
of the dislocation of the back spine
When the dislocation of the back or neck is reset, if there are many resets, there is no cure, for death quickly follows the patient.
And the signs are that the patient faints uncontrollably and cannot hold it, and sometimes certain limbs become weakened, such as both thighs or arms or one.
And often the dislocation moves to four parts;
She who moves to the rear is called "gibosity":
the treatment is that you observe whether the gibosity has come from childhood: there is no cure or healing for it at all.
And she who comes from falling or from blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treating such cases with great words yield no significant benefit in all respects;
but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding, and have fashioned instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gibosity that occurs at the worst front, there is no remedy or health;
And likewise for the one that comes directly to the two sides, and cannot be treated except by the one properly coming to the back, as I say;
And it is that the patient lie stretched on their face in an equal place, and have someone pull back behind them so they do not roll over;
Then fix a stake at the head in the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a rope under the armpits of the patient, and one at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
And two ministers hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes;
and let them be well closed, the torch as we have said, and the physician place his palms on the spine firmly, until it relieves.
And if it does not relieve with this cure, take a board three arms long, and place it under the side, and let the patient lie on their side, then insert the end of the board under the side, then put the middle of the board over the spine; and let the physician place his feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly until it returns to its place;
and if you wish, do it with a wrench that turns with the hand. And place two torches at the head of the patient from one large arm and near the feet two others, and have between each torch, above and below, a palm's space apart;
and have in each torch one hole where the flame turns, and let the torches be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move;
and between each pair of torches have one rotating torch, upon which the ropes turn, and have two small torches of a palm's length apart in the rotating ones, for turning the flame;
and then tie the rope that is between the chairs to the rotating torch near the head, and the other rope near the feet to the other rotating torch, and each of the assistants turns their torch for the entire length of the rope, and the master sets the needle evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, place on a drying plaster with plenty of egg, and then the cotton, and then the splint of three fingers long to cover the location of the curvature and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with linen as we have said, and the patient should use gentle nourishment until he is well.
and if anything comes at the end of recovery, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we mentioned above; and sometimes a piece of plaster is applied, and at times the appearance occurs in the rear spine of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that shows, for which one must not have presumption: by misadventure it might bring about death.
Know that at the joints of the hip and the shoulder, only dislocations occur, not like at other joints;
and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind;
and more inward than otherwise, and slightly dislocated in front and behind.
And the recognition of an inward dislocation is that when joining the affected leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the patient's knee appears more bent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee towards the fire; And the area which is near the swelling of the abscess is hot, because the knee comes there.
And the signs of him who is coming to faint are contrary to those mentioned before.
And the signs of one who is affected in front are that they stretch their leg according to the completion; nevertheless, they do not double their knee despite pain, and if one wants to make them go forward, they cannot advance, and they hold back their urine, and the groin swells, and when they walk, they step over the heel.
And the signs of him who is coming to a condition behind are that he cannot extend his knee or bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in a position below the ribs.
The treatment for this type of dislocation is that you observe whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, with no specific care; and it is not appropriate for them to have confidence.
And in the one where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four types of dislocation, hasten to return the joint, and stretch it inward and outward, and move it right and left; and perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one ligature that is tied above the knee; and another minister should stretch his hand above in such a manner that he places his hands beneath the buttocks, then bind it with a single tight ligature on the thigh; and some others hold the head of the joint;
and extend both up and down at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and suspend them.
This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then you must apply treatment as appropriate.
When the dislocation is towards the inside, you must lift the patient onto their healthy side, then place the joint at the root of the thigh, and the area below the armpit, then extend the joint upwards toward the armpit, and toward the shoulder.
then take other assistants to hold his arms, and embrace the thick part of the affected thigh, and extend it forcefully outward: It will return to its place now;
and this type of dislocation is less severe than the others.
And if you cannot secure it in the manner we have described, then you must bind both of the patient's feet together with a strong cord just above the two heels, and also above the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two palms longer than the other.
then suspend him from the top of a post, and let it be two arm lengths above the ground;
then instruct one minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient, who firmly embraces the thigh, because the joint will now quickly return.
And when the dislocation is out of place, the patient lies down, as we have said regarding him who has gout, and tightly bind the limb on the affected leg, and also on the foot.
then place two torches, one at the head and one at the feet, then insert a torch between the thighs of the patient in the proper position; and have placed damp cloths around it so that it does not burn the patient, then each assistant extends towards him, and the physician places his hand equally on the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, place him on the table and press as we have said regarding gilbositeit, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to quickly extend the affected leg as I have said; And let the physician exert himself to be on the affected side, then press with the other hand, and stretch it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is towards the front, it is not appropriate to stretch the patient downward or lift them up, but rather they should be positioned as if the thigh were dislocated forward, as we have said about the position when lying on both thighs; and let the patient lie on their back, and the limb be stretched as we have said previously, and one should press above the joint onto the table; and it will be correct when the patient extends their legs, and they will be even; Then place the thighs together, apply the plaster, and wrap them tightly with a bandage so that the thigh does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then remove the bandage and reapply the plaster;
and if you see that they are even, wrap them as before and leave it for three days;
then remove the bandage, and have him walk gently, until the limb is healed.
Of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward;
and do not reset before.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not rest there, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee gently; and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he rests his leg on the thigh lightly;
and apply the plaster on it, and raise the leg at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three days or four, then loosen it;
and the patient does not work to walk until the limb is healed and strengthened.
And if the limb is not properly set, apply strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is healed
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and feels soft in the area where it is dislocated:
the reduction is easy, and it should be gently extended with his hands when he is slightly moved.
And when it is quickly reduced, you must make the patient sit upright, and have one assistant hold him a distance away by the leg, above the ankle;
Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then place it upright, and firmly push the foot upwards;
and do this twice, as we have said, both pushing and pulling the foot;
if it returns, it is well;
if not, then restart the work, for it will return;
and if it cannot return in this manner, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly place a lever between their thighs in the ground, and tie ropes around them so that the patient does not move;
Then the minister should hold the thigh, and another minister should extend the foot with his hands or on a board, and bind it at the neck of the foot; Then each minister should extend equally, and the patient should be firmly between the thighs of the patient when they are stretching him;
Then the physician should place the dislocation in his hands equally, and another minister should hold the healthy leg behind, and the dislocation will quickly return to its proper position.
And when it is properly set, apply the plaster and bandages tightly, and bind the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the back of the ankle, so that the binding is not too tight;
then leave it for two days or three, and if the ligaments soften, then stretch it;
then loosen it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before this
And if an abscess comes up, you must treat it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of the two When both are dislocated, they must be gently extended without strain, and this is an easy task.
And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back of the foot, you must have the patient sit on a flat surface or on a .ie. table straight, and place your foot against what appears of these joints, then press strongly with your foot until it returns;
and when it is even, and nothing appears, place under the sole of the foot a board with II joints, then pull strongly, and leave it for III days, then untie it; and have him rest until he is healed.
of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies:
Do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and patient, nor bold;
and begin with things that soothe an acute abscess, and leave the patient in Gods hands if you see no hope for recovery; and when you see hope for recovery, now reset the limb to its place so that the hot abscess may come to life;
and when the limb is in place, administer things that soothe an acute abscess, and treat the wound as necessary with drying ointments;
And if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones displaced, remove them, and do as we have said in simple diseases;
And guard against entering a path of fear as I have said, for it is your duty according to your Creator, and for the skill in your arm and your body.
