Oh you, dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its contents, and I have made the end by its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is discouraged in our region and is entirely foreign, the science has been lost and fragmented, and nothing remains of its exterior except for small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and the science is distant.
It seems to me that I should revive it together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the cautery instruments, and of other tools of the work along with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because there is no skilled master to be found in our time, the art of medicine has become neglected. And it is necessary for those who engage in this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the truth about the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles, and the number of them, and the movement and rest of veins, and their origin.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and especially in the art of medicine.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above should be careful not to err and harm people;
so I have often seen many who meddle with this art and abandon both their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut into the abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and he cut the arteries of the neck; so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; and he took part of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to remove it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut into it he would die.
And I saw another doctor who treated the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and along with the break there was a wound;
and the physician, full of ignorance, tightens the bandage over the wound on the splints very tightly, and leaves no cloth for the wound at all, and he left it thus.
and he commands that it must not be untied;
and he left it thus until the leg and foot were swollen completely, and it led to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and untie the leg; and when I had it loosened, it was in peace and felt no pain.
But the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed.
And the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was lost.
And I saw another doctor who drained the embedded abscess and then inflamed it by the malice of his authority.
For a carbuncle, when it is full of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place where one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
And for that reason, children, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two categories: that is to say, work where there is danger in many situations;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to be careful so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your arms cautiously, and approach your patients lightly yet firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may achieve salvation and be praised;
and let the terrible diseases of severe fever be left;
and remove your weapons from what you fear, and act in such a way that you may come from this world to the next in glory.
Galien says in some of his warnings: Do not take care of a severe illness, or you may be called a mad doctor.
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal hot cauterizations, and the chapter is organized from head to feet;
and about the forms of instruments, and cauterization tools, and all that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and the chapter is organized and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and is organized from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus, as we remember the work, it is necessary for me to tell the quality of the aid and harm of each temperament.
I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest speech and subtle science and secret responses;
and many wise people spoke about this, and agreed on it;
And they suffocate me with their words, for I fear the length.
I say that the cautery universally aids all temperaments where there is matter, except for two temperaments: that is to say, the hot temperament without matter, and the dry temperament without matter.
In the hot and dry temperament together with matter, some have discussed and said that the cautery is of great help there; and others said the opposite: that the cautery is not useful for a disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat a hot disease by heat, nor for dryness;
And he who says otherwise states that cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases that come to the bodies of men. For when you examine the body of the person and their moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it to be true through experience.
And in any case, do not intervene except for those who have tested it, and who know through long practice the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and their outcomes and the space of time;
we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the doctors gathered and agreed on the cautery.
And know, son, that the fire cautery together is of the secrets of healing, and of greater goodness than the burning cauterizing agent.
For the fire is simple, and it does not harm any part other than the one being treated, nor does it hurt another limb if there is any.
Purgative medicines move from one limb to another, spreading them apart, and cause the affected member to develop diseases of difficult recovery; and by chance, it may kill the patient.
The fire, because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance, does not do that unless there is excess.
And I have found this through experience and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the truth of things;
and for that reason I excuse myself for the length of speech, because it does not please me to take from you the secret which is hidden in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it removes bodily diseases, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on the time when the cauterizations should be performed, and chose suitable days.
And I say that the cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmful effects occurring are removed by the aid of the cautery; And especially if the cauterizations are necessary for pains that cannot wait, so that the member does not suffer greater harm.
And do not think about it, dear boy, as foolish doctors do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no relapse; and they say it like this;
and they say it like this; but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are a medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors which cause pain, and is worth more than other medicines for their speed of action and by the virtue of their work and their efficacy.
And it is possible for the illness to come sometimes according to the constitution of the patient and the location and nature of the illness;
and are gathered within him the excesses from the consumption of food and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered in places where there is little excess and moisture, such as for toothache and other similar pains, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the rear of medicine, and this is true;
but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth using after medicine, but their beliefs are false, and cauterizations are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in certain illnesses and they are ineffective, then we use the cauterization, and it proves effective.
Then it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauterizations with an instrument of gold are more effective than those with iron, and they said this not for any reason other than the quality of the gold and the height of its substance;
and they said that the scar from a cauterization does not cause irritation, but this is not true because I have experienced it and found that it is true in some people;
and cauterizations with gold are better than those with iron, as they claim; And still, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down so quickly;
and if one heats it too much; do with fire; and thus there is sufficient obstruction.
I have ordered this chapter from head to foot so that the path may be easier to find.
This cautery is useful for moisture and cold affecting the brain, and there are two reasons why it is made: due to a disease called "soda," and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and also for numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a solvent medicine cleansing the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength and age and habit of the patient can endure; and then do behind the head of the patient.
And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his thighs;
then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; And there where your two means will come, if you bleed the joint then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", of which here is the form: And place on the spot an ink stain, and do it descending and squeezing your hand bit by bit while turning; then lift your hand immediately, and examine the spot if you see the bone slightly; and if you do not see it, then repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I told you;
after take some wax, and put soft cotton inside it, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days;
Then place a damp cloth made of butter. and leave it on until the heat subsides; Then treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmacos" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason, they help it heal.
And some say that the cautery should be left on until part of the bone is burned, and then one removes what has been burned from the bone, and it is treated.
And others say that the cautery should be left on for so long and pressed hard enough to abrade the bone as wide as a finger, so that the humors are expelled from the body;
and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after which it should be cleaned and treated.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem entirely good to me, except in certain individuals where there is reason for fear;
and I think that I should leave it aside;
for the head of the joint is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we witness in other limbs;
and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems safer and more suitable for me, I then proceed with it for safety.
When chronic pain comes to the entire head and lasts for a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills which are called "cochie", and purge the head with oils and plasters; and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, it does not work. Take care if the patient's condition is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a little as we said above. After cauterize on each horn of the head until the bone, as we said before, and perform the cautery at the place called "vessel"; and there are places where one applies cups; and place your hand so that you do not see until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later;
and it is necessary that the cauteries for the horns be finer than those used to cauterize the softness of the head, and this is their form:
For the cautery of the head When sudden pain comes to a part of the head, and the illness extends to the eye, and the head has been purged with medicinal cleansing agents, and all the other treatments I have mentioned in the section on illnesses have been performed, but none of it helps: Then you perform cauterizations according to two methods, namely with cold medicines and with fire.
The cauterization with cold medicine is done by taking a piece of ice, removing the skin and covering it with two pieces of cloth, then applying it to the temple where the pain is in such a way that you can place the piece of ice beneath the skin;
and when it is placed, wrap and secure it well and leave it like this for twelve hours; and then undo it and treat the area with garlic, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then apply a cloth soaked in butter until it becomes saturated.
After the treatment of ointment until it is healed;
and if you wish to use some burning medicines that I have written in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
The cautery of iron is done according to this manner. Heat the cautery as follows:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a knob with a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance;
and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn it slightly, until half the thickness of the heart's fat is burned;
and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and there will be an abundance of blood flow.
After place cotton on a thread, and put over the area for three days; then place moistened cotton with butter, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed;
and if you wish to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called "cultellare", at its tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this hemorrhoid which is not old.
of swelling
When you treat hemorrhoids as we said before in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and see that the previously mentioned cauteries from medicine and iron do no good, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white;
and mark thus on the painful area a line half a digit long, and remove your hand once, and strain that you do not cut the artery and that you do not reach the bone;
and be wary of the mandible that moves when eating, and the nerve must pay attention to the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting causes great fear and especially for one who does not know it, and who is not studied and experienced; and leave the work in progress;
but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not help the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize on top of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
and if you see fit, apply the cauterization that we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, using a cauterizing tool with two blades; and these cauterizations are better and more effective than the others.
of the pain in the ears due to coldness
When pain from cold comes to the ear, and one has used medicines that dissolve and other treatments which we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "points," of which here is the form:
After puncturing all around the affected ear, or both ears if the pain is in both, and move slightly above the base of the ear once you have marked the spot; and place ten points around each ear;
after treating the area until it is healed.
of the treatment of the mouth
There is no ulcer that should be treated with cauterization except those that are moved by phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases;
and do not make any cauterization for conditions that come from dryness and nerve spasms.
When you treat this condition of ulcer that is moved by phlegm from hydrosis and purging of the head and gargling, and if it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and apply it opposite the top of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as far as one finger's width; and leave the cautery on until half of the heart area is burned;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And it resembles the cautery we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and the knife should be a little larger;
After treatment of the area as I said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is longstanding and the treatment does not help as we have said, and the patient has no fever, then I make four cauterizations: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place which is called "navel" as we said before, and the last cauterization above the stomach.
and let them be treated as we said before.
For litargy (a condition characterized by foot
For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills purifying the brain;
After lifting the head of the patient completely, place on the occiput the plaster of mustard which is written in the treatise on plasters;
and this is the method of the cautery: do it as I have said.
If he is well in this way, it is good; and if he is not, perform three cauterizations from the middle of the head descending to the neck, and leave one thumb's width between each cauterization;
and treat it as the others, and if you wish to add more, and the patient is suffering, perform one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and treat until it is healed;
and let the cauterization be what is called "olivare", as I said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of lice and as we said before;
after raising the head of the patient, then perform cauterization in the middle of the head and on each horn, one at the back and three along the neck spine;
and if you need more cauterizations, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the illness is severe, perform four cauterizations along the spine; and let it stay until the most tender part is burned, and lift your hand; after the treatment until it is healed, and use the cauterization method called "olivare" which we mentioned earlier.
of epilepsy
Those with epilepsy should not use the fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffers from difficult treatment.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate this, perform a gargle and chewing exercise to cleanse the brain often with good meat;
after placing the patient's head in the middle, perform the cauterization as we said earlier, and do the cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and suffering, perform cauterizations as I said for those who have paralysis and weakness of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and use the olive cauterization method as I described.
If the patient is a child, perform the subtle cautery according to this method:
When due to melancholy the excesses or humors are corrupted and phlegm is thick, then use such cauteries as we have described for one who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the excesses tend towards melancholy and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies the brain, as described previously in the division.
Raise the patient's head; then place a well-made bandage of linen, as circular as possible, over the head;
and have the patient sit cross-legged and hold them firmly from all sides;
then present the dressing, which should be made of old sheep's wool; and heat it over a fire to the appropriate temperature, so that when applied to the wound, the patient can tolerate it; then empty the circle inward over the head and let it cool;
and do this for the patient once every week along with other good care until they are healed.
If you wish to cauterize, make many small points across the entire cautery area.
This method of cautery moistens the brain excessively;
and then place cotton soaked in butter and goose fat on it.
from the pain of the eyes When pain first comes to the eyes with the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying to drink, and protect them from all dampness, and make them sweat in baths several times on an empty stomach.
After instructing him to lie with his head back, perform a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on each temple if the descent of the brain is to both eyes together, or one if it is to one eye;
and for the entire cautery, ensure all veins and arteries below the heart are prepared, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
and be wary of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with as much force as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the caution how you will stop it;
and sometimes a cautery is made to separate the two bones behind.
and when it is seen that it is from cold and phlegmatic excesses, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the chapter descending to the eyes: I make one cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on each temple, and two cauteries where the bones are separated behind; and if there is need for more, then cauterize carefully above the eyebrow with the small cautery.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and it does no good, then give the patient three cooked nights' worth to drink; after the king's head, and perform the cauterization in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery; and perform two cauterizations of the cautery called "clavilis" above the two eyebrows, a little below the hair;
and be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.
And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the white of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare". of which this is the form:
And if you wish, perform two cauterizations above the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
and do not leave the hand aside until one-third of the parchment is burned, according to the manner I have said.
of the hair that points at the eye Sometimes the hair of the eyes turns inward and pricks the eye, and one makes cauterizations according to two methods: that is to say with fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in your care; after marking on the paper around the eyes a figure that is as round as a myrtle leaf, and let the beginning of the mark be among the hairs;
then place cotton moistened in egg white and parsley juice on the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
After cauterizing around the figure you have marked little by little many times, so that the skin is burned in that place;
and the signs of the treatment's success are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs raised at the edge of the eye;
then lift your hand, and leave it like this for III days, then place moistened cotton in butter until the inflammation subsides; after the treatment of salving until he is healthy.
And if the hairs come after that, and the skin is softened, then restart the cautery on the same spot as you did before;
and if the hairs have fallen out, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural place, and is even, so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
The fiery cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make from parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf;
then take one part each of French soap and quicksilver, and grind them together well; and I do it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it over the area as you have prepared like a myrtle leaf, and place on top the paper of the eyes; and if the illness affects only one eye, then treatment should be applied to that one, and similarly if both are affected; and place on the eye cotton moistened in egg white;
and the patient's head should be on your right and place your left hand over the medication, and press down and move it every time the patient feels a burning sensation from the medicine, for they feel burning as if from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine at its proper time. And when the burning sensation has passed, lift the area of the eye, and check if you see the paper lifted as it would be raised by the constraint of fire or by cutting; And if it is thus, then it is well.
If not, then apply the medicine again to the site where it was applied until your work is even, and your eyes are properly set;
then apply moist wool in butter until the burnt area is healed, after which treat the ointment site, called "diaphysis" and others, until it is healthy.
And if it is necessary for you to be very careful in your work so that none of the medicine falls into the eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hair pricks in the eye, then reapply the medicine to that place which is softened by the paper properly, as you did before; after treating it until it is healed;
and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And note that the eyes of people vary in size and smallness, and adjust accordingly your treatments;
and do not reveal the correct way to one who does not study this art.
for the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then it is necessary to apply cautery according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor should they shift their head;
then place cotton soaked in egg white or parsley juice on the eye;
After heating the cautery which is like this:
and it is shaped for the head like the form of a falcon's feather, so that the cautery is curved accordingly;
if you wish, it should be straight from one end to the other, and if you wish, it should resemble a tent;
but in any case, this shape is suitable for your work.
After pressing the open fistula and extracting the pus, dry it; and if it is closed, work on it and draw out the fluid;
After place the hot cautery, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the bridge above the eye, so that your hand does not do foolishly; and place the cautery on the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you proceed to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well. If not, then repeat the cautery once more, and again if you need it, and leave it for three days;
after place cotton moistened with butter, and the remedy of a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then place a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat the king according to what he would receive in his chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients described. Attend to the fistula, and clean the area; then place in the fissure some fine powder of which this is the formula: and use an amount equal to one grain of pepper; and hold your hand firmly over the powder, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the melted wax does not run into their eye;
and it is necessary to place over the patient's eye cotton moistened with egg whites or honey:
the powder then closes the fistula, and it heals wonderfully.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer a perforation with a knife, and bring the fistula back into the body of the knife according to what is appropriate in its proper place.
cracks in the lips Cracks in the lips, which are called "hairs," often occur, especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in the divisions, and the treatment is ineffective, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
And quickly place it in those cavities until it reaches the top;
after treating the area with plaster until it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the gum or in the uvula, or at the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it then becomes pus-filled and swollen and is aged and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not help: then you must use the cautery according to the size of the fistula; then pierce or drill into the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches its depth, and at the end;
and do thus once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until he is healed;
and if he is treated thus, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to uncover the site and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in his chapter.
When the gums become softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but that does not help, then place the head of the patient in your lap; after heating the cautery in such a manner that you place a chain on the tooth;
and place quickly into the cautery hot [object], and hold it so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth;
after lift your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish;
after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let it stay for one hour and rinse out.
And in this manner, the tooth that was moving becomes fixed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
of the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold, whether there is actual coldness and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then there is need for cautery in two manners: and cautery with leather and cautery with fire.
Cautery with leather is such that you take leather from the side of an animal, and place it in a spoon made of iron or brass; After take cotton and wrap around the tip of a needle, and soften in boiled butter, and apply quickly to the aching tooth and keep until it cools.
And thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish, soften wool and cotton in cold butter, and apply to the aching tooth, and place hot iron until the heat reaches the top of the tooth.
The fire cautery is such that you take an iron or brass rod, and it should be thick so the heat does not reach the patient's mouth;
After heat the cautery, from which the form will come next, and apply it to the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled;
Do this often, for the pain will be removed that very day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with clean butter at the time of this cautery, and then lie still;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And apply the cautery to whichever part you wish, according to your ability;
and this is the form of the cane:
scrofulous glands When scrophula is of phlegm and cold moisture, and does not respond to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery according to what follows in this form, and have two openings for the smoke to exit on the opposite side of the cautery;
and place the hot cautery once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to its size, and leave it like this for three days; and apply moist wool soaked in butter until the sore is healed;
after treating the area with ointments and dressings until it is healed.
When moisture overcomes the channels of the body, especially when it comes from cold constitution, then the patient must first be cleared by dissolving medicines;
After you make a cautery at the root of the throat, be careful not to go up to the throat, and do not burn near the heart but a little bit.
Then make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the base of the spine, and let the cauteries that are called "clavile" be as we have shown their form before;
and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
When all the diseases of phlegm are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then make two cauteries on the forearm in their places; And the other cautery is between two mammary glands;
And let the cautery which is called "clavile" be according to the form that was previously described.
And if you wish, perform the cautery by pricking the entire area of the cautery which is called "poins," whose form was described above in the disease of the ears;
And let the points be up to thirty, or inquire around for more specific guidance.
After treating the area as described previously, let the cauterizations be three rows according to this form:
And for those the cauterizations are lighter, because you make three at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After have the patient lie on their back and side; then lift the knee that is inside the thigh with both of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two edges of equine horn thus is its form:
and cauterize the area until it pierces to the bone, and the shape of the cautery would be four cauteries altogether;
and for that reason is made the cautery with the one that has three edges, which is why the shapes of the cauterizations are six cauteries;
and the nerve runs according to the subtlety of a thread and this is the form of the cautery which has three edges:
And sometimes it is applied to this one nerve, which results in eight cautery marks.
After place on the cautery powder made from herbs ground with salt; After making the patient rest, do not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
And if it is dislocated above, which thing happens seldom, then make cauterization on the thick part of the cauterized navel, or many cauterizations by pricking.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When coldness and much moisture come into the stomach such that it strays from its temperament, and his catarrh is multiplied to him, and in customary methods of cure he profits not at all, then it must be that the patient be laid on his back, and stretch out his legs and hands. From then on, perform three cauterizations. One with the spoonful of pitch in the proper quantity for one cautery at the clavicle, and two cauterizations outside the two sides until the shape of the cauterizations forms a triangle, and leave such space between each so that they do not join together when they discharge pus;
and let the cauterizations be deep enough to reach both sides of the chest, and let the shape of the cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
And if you wish to cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form;
And he who fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and cutting one point on the stomach according to the quantity that you wish of it; then cauterize with the entire cautery which is called "points".
After the care of the treatment that we had before, until it is healed.
When the liver suffers pain from cold and moisture and excessive gas, to such an extent that it is weakened from its natural constitution by excesses; and the patient is treated with what we have mentioned in the divisions, and it does not help, then the patient must be bled from the head; and mark three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, away from the hypochondria, where the ribs of a person are;
and there should be a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be of medium length and do not press too hard with your hand along the entire cautery;
and burn only half the heart area, and have the patient stand upright on their feet;
and if he cannot stand, let him lie down, and stretch out his legs, and raise his arms;
And if you wish, cauterize these cauteries of the scapular region, but only if you are subtle and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the entire heart area, for you would cause the whole body to dry up; and let it not come to the eye, for the nerve is very delicate there, and you know this well.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain, but not too strong;
and if it is in the membrane, the pain is severe.
And when this treatment requires the use of leeches, it is necessary that the patient lie on their head;
and then incise the area where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a reed, as follows: And cauterize until the flesh is burned, and proceed until it reaches sepsis, so that all the tissue is completely charred;
after the treatment according to the treatment of boils until it is healed;
and it is not appropriate for anyone except those who have studied extensively in the art of medicine and whose hands have successfully treated such diseases at times to use this cautery.
Then he can boldly proceed with the treatment, yet it seems to me that leaving it alone might be better.
for the cautery of pleurisy
The ancient ones said that for pleurisy, cauterizations should be made with the roots of aristolochia, and in such a manner: take a root of aristolochia, as long as you can find, and it should be dry, and as thick and as long as your thumb; And the meat in oil, and press it to the fire, and cauterize I cautery between the shoulder blade and neck, and II small cauters a bit descending in the part which is below the beard;
And II cauterizations between the fifth and sixth rib, declining slightly to the back; And I cauterization in the middle of the back, and one above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the ribs of the back outside the cauterization which is between the two shoulders;
And do not press your hand, but do it openly as if in smelling.
And some ancient ones say that some people use a fire cautery similar to a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; And thus the pain is gone, as we have said regarding the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear of the patient dying now, or a fistula may come which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it is ineffective, then they offer three methods of cautery that are all good.
In one method, you should perform three or four cauterizations along the length of the arm, according to the shape of the liver cauterization that we mentioned earlier;
and do not press your hand on the entire cauterization area, and have the patient lie on their back;
and another method of cauterization is to heat the double-bladed cautery as we have shown in the case of shoulder dislocation;
and lift the side where the arm is affected, where the patient's wound comes from the left side, and raise it along the length of the body, and let the cauterizations be according to the width of the body.
After inserting the two inflamed nerves until the pain is felt on the other side, then draw out the fire cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you wish, cauterize with the fire cautery using three nerves.
After the treatment when pus has been discharged for a long time, it is worth noting that this applies to the other treatments mentioned before.
Cautery is not effective for someone with hydropsy, except in the manner known as "asclytes".
When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment is of no use, then you must make four cauteries around the throat, one on the stomach, one above the liver, one above the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast. and let the cauteries be close to the place of the pain.
After leaving the cautery open for a long time to expel pus, do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing would be hastened, and the two intentions would be together with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the abdomen should be in the shape of a clamp that we have demonstrated before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as it is shown above.
When the feet are swollen in one who is suffering from dropsy and are filled with yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery to turn.
And do not enter too deeply, lest you hit the citrine bone, and let the cauterization be in this form:
After make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the heel; and let the cauterizations be long, one above the knee in front and one below the knee, in the middle of the leg;
and leave the cauterizations exposed for a long time without cleaning, so it may heal;
after the treatment of other treatments that we have mentioned.
When a cold and moisture cause abdominal distension, such that the retaining and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be treated by usual methods; And you see the patient suffering greatly and of great strength, then make a large cautery on the stomach as has been spoken about earlier in the fire cautery for the stomach, to the circular cautery; And four subtle cauteries around the throat, and one subtle nail-shaped cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each armpit, and two small cauteries near the stomach close to the large area, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we said in the divisions, and it does not help, then make cauteries: Three on the spine of the back, those that are far out from each rib space and in a triangular pattern, and two below the throat, one must be made;
And if you think his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling in the face, then place a large cautery over the stomach as was previously stated, and another over the liver, and another over the spleen for the entire cautery length. And leave the cautery open for a long time. After treating the area until it is healed.
When you apply althaea, heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it fully heated on the applied althaea. And keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the beginning of the vein, where the blood cuts.
Do this once or twice, and if there is much althaea, cauterize each area as we have said. after the treatment of beneficial applications until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the navel area, it will be more effective.
When the patient cannot bear cutting or incision, which we shall recount in its place, if such a sickness comes that can only be healed by cautery.
When a fistula comes to someone, and it is inflamed and discharges corrupt matter and moisture, then you should prove with a probe how deep it is, and be sure that you know the depth of the probe completely.
Heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the extent of the tent's entry, and continue cauterizing until the rotten and corrupted flesh is burned, once or twice or thrice, depending on what is needed.
and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby and the large veins.
if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, be careful in these areas, and do not make them too deep, and remember that it is not permissible.
after treating the wound until it is healed, and if the wound is clean, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then you can know that the wound is completely healed;
and if the matter has not been removed, know that the wound is infected, and the bone may be corrupted; and thus as one of those we will mention in its place.
When pain from cold comes to the thighs, and due to large flatulence, and does not respond to treatment by women, then you must perform a cautery on both sides of the thighs with the key-shaped cautery that we mentioned earlier;
and if we perform the cautery in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will provide more help.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and feeble from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then apply cautery to the outer part above the bladder where the hair of the pubis begins, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the breadth of a palm;
and apply one cautery outside the back, or two if you need them;
and let the cauterizations be in the shape of a key according to the form mentioned before.
When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for that reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary that they make three cauterizations around the navel, as we have said in the fire cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations on either side of the back;
and let the cauterizations be made with a knife, as we have said.
When the viscous humors descend to the thigh cavity, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and the place of departure is found nearby, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the thigh cavity with a cautery resembling a circle, and cut in front of the area around the thigh as it turns, so that the thigh is within the circle;
And let the cauterizations be such as those by which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cauterization is not present for you, make three large cauterizations of the olive tree, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all others;
and treat it until it is healed.
of the pain in the thigh When pain comes to the hip joint, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have described in the section, but the treatment does not help, and the illness is old: then it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humors with foul-smelling pills or other similar good pills. After performing cauterization;
and the method of cauterization is according to two methods: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Fire cauterization is according to many methods, one of which is as follows:
that you cauterize on the buttock three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make them deep and large, with a space between each cauterization as thick as two fingers, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped;
Sometimes a cauterization is made in the middle at the top of the buttock, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, cauterize it with the cautery of the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the hip;
but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the nerves be burned.
And this is the way it is done for sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach as far as the thigh or the leg.
And if it reaches to the thigh and the leg, place two cauterizations where the patient says the pain is, and one cauterization above the ankle four digits away on the left side;
and let the cauterizations be circular, and burn the thickness of the nerve;
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers from the toe or closer, cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cauterization called "points"; And if necessary, do more to it;
And if he knows that the pain is above the knee towards the thigh, do a cutaneous or circular cautery for him, and be very careful with all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery burning so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who applied a cautery to the ankle of the foot and left it on so long that the leg became swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and all the foot corrupted. After a belly remedy from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, apply a cautery to each one according to this method.
And the wise ones said regarding the cautery of the hip, concerning which this is the method, make it like iron and let it be as thick as a date stone, or a bit less, and let it alternate and from one alternation to another by a space the quantity of a barleycorn;
and let the crosspieces be on both sides, and let them also be like knots, and there should be one iron handle well made;
and this is the form:
And heat it until it is completely red and sparks fly, and then place it on the thigh of the affected side, and turn it over to the healthy side;
and apply the cautery once with the red-hot instrument and leave it for three days; and then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after treating it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery little due to his fear regarding it, and if we see little who uses it;
and nevertheless, this is one of the good cauterizations, which can be endured by those who it affects.
The cautery of burning medicine is made such that you make the instrument with interlocking parts in which descends the margin of the door, and it should be of brass or iron on one side long, and at the height have two sides, and between each have the thickness of a finger. and let them be open at both ends and join together according to this form:
Then place the hip joint of the patient lying on their healthy side, and then place your hand high up on the hip joint; After pour it between the two circles of warm water heated over fire for one pot, and let it remain for an hour of time, and allow the patient to experience the warmth and burning sensation.
For there it causes burns just as fire would;
and when the treatment is finished, lift your hand with the instrument and raise it in warm water, and leave it this way for three days, and apply butter until the blackened part from the burn is gone; and let him remain for three days so that pus can be discharged;
and this would be the final aid after the treatment with ointments until he is healed.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make the instrument that fits according to what you have done for the thigh similarly;
and this is the manner of making it hot, and I have written it in the treatise on the preparation of medicines. Take alkaline substances and quicklime, equal parts of each, and grind them together, then put them in a new pot. where there is a small aperture through which the tip of a razor can enter;
where there is a small aperture through which the tip of a razor can enter; and place another well-leaded pot on that one, and put alkaline substances and charcoal above it, and cover with something gentle until there is enough to have two layers of powder which you will have properly prepared in your hand;
and leave it like this until water and sediment descend into the leaded pot, then take all that water and pour it over charcoal and alkaline substances as before.
And then it will be very severe and is treated with many medical practices and cauterizations of other limbs.
For it performs work like fire, and there are other medicines with which one can effectively cauterize the thigh such as mustard, honey from the anacardium plant, and salt mixed together.
And Galien tells us of a cure where a nobleman was cured of hip pain and sciatic nerve pain, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other treatment was given, and that he was healed in one attempt when this cure was applied, and he bathed as he instructs hereafter.
And he says in this manner that you should take green and dry litharge and grind it very finely with a little grease, and apply it to the thigh, the leg, or wherever the pain is, and bind it.
and leave it on for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
And then have them enter the bath until their body is slightly warmed, and then have them go to bed, and the pain will entirely disappear and they will be healed.
And you must know that no one should use such medicines for cauterization before the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hair, it helps much;
and it should be done in such a manner. Take wool and smear it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe and the next toe, which is called the fosicle.
After taking dry goat hair, hold it over fire until it turns to embers, and place it on the wool, leaving it until it becomes ashes;
and do it again in this way, and continue doing so until you think by sense that it reaches up to the thigh, and the pain is ceased;
and this manner of cauterization is called "goat hair cauterization".
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from impact or from excessive blood letting, or from similar cold substances spread out, cauterization is not suitable for any of these cases, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary that after the patient has been purged of foul pills or other similar substances, three lines be marked on the back where the pain resides, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure;
and let the cauterizations be performed according to the cautery known as "points";
and if you wish, perform three or four cauterizations at the middle clavicle according to this form:
This illness often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have tightness in the chest when they rise, and fear; And you find in the last spine of the back and in its appearance which comes above the other spines.
When you see this and wish to treat it, cauterize it with the fire cautery according to this form. So that the cauterization affects each part of the spine equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pricking cautery in lines of two or three, and let the points be close to each other.
After treating the area until it is healthy as we have said, and beware of applying a cautery to a joint that is in a state of nerve spasm.
of the pain in the joints
When pain in joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each limb, and when the pain comes in feet, which physicians call "gout" properly, and when it is due to a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is treated with cauterization in such a manner:
make the cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need to cauterize the top of the foot, then make the cauterization entirely what is called "a point. And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, make three or four cauterizations on each knee in each part, making each cauterization olive-shaped;
and if you need more, do more, but do not extend your hand beyond the point at which the hair of the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend down to the knees and the back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make poultices around the wrist for two lines;
and if there remains pain in the two hands, make poultices on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come to the hips or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and administer good care to the patient and appropriate medicines.
For if you give it proper management and purge phlegm, he will be healthy with God's help.
When rupture occurs in the groin, and the bowel descends to the thighs and this is recent, then when you wish to treat it, he must not eat that day; and that he uses things that loosen the belly, so that the feces come out of his belly;
after you make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath until the eyes are restored, and reset them with your fingers, and draw a line at the base of the wound above the bone of the little finger, and make a mark that resembles half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery which has this shape:
until it is white and until it sheds scales. Then reset the eyes to their place; and the minister holds his hand so that they do not move back;
And work well on the patients thighs, and place a cushion underneath him and a strap over his thighs, and another under his buttocks to hold his hands.
Then place the cautery on the mark with your entire hand, and hold it straight until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone. And be careful that the eye does not pop out when you perform the cautery; and do not burn it; and that the patient does not die because of it, or suffer other harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cauterizations for children be delicate according to their measure, and for adults also large according to their size;
after three days, treat the area of the cauterization with butter until the burn is gone;
after that, treat with other ointments until he is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well sealed;
and it is necessary that his nursing sessions be prolonged so that his eyes do not protrude when he tries to go into rooms.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, give him a well-made bandage, and let him use it for another forty days;
and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard against too great a surfeit of drinking and eating, and of high jumping.
and when he follows this teaching, he is completely healed.
And I will say hereafter the treatment for cutting in his chapter.
When ruptures occur in other parts of the body and are noticeable, and you wish to prevent them from growing larger, apply a cautery according to its size, and let one-third be burned. after the treatment as we have said;
and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
but mark the site first and draw a line along the width above the rupture, and another below it, and then carefully apply the cautery in between.
But the first cauterizations are lighter and gentler.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being injured, and that pain lasts long, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cauterization should follow the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and its pain.
If he is well from the first cautery, it is good;
if that is the case, repeat another cautery on top of it, because such a custom is that it must change to the member that is nearest, so you must perform the cauterizations until the patient is well.
The ailments are sometimes aided by cauterization with great care, especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you see that it needs to be cauterized, take care if the illness is in its beginning stage, and if it has been treated according to what we have said in the division, and do not stop or delay, and if you fear that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then perform V cauterizations on the head: I place it at the back of the head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the occipital;
and leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the bone, and until the bark comes out so that the vapors of thick humors can escape;
and cauterize on the wound as it is in front.
And if the disorder is spread everywhere; and it becomes evident that you must cauterize with the cauterizations we have mentioned for the head, and one cauterization near the nose, and two cauteries on the neck vertebrae, and six cauteries on the back vertebrae, and one large one on the buttocks and another nearby, and two on the shoulders; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the heel so as not to burn them;
and sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the thumb, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that the more cauterizations you perform, the more help you give, and it benefits the patient;
and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already completely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cautery should be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you find in the ways of iron instruments.
After treatment, cover the wound with flour of wheat mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then I make cauterizations on the limb according to its size.
and let the cauterizations penetrate slightly into the thickness of the skin; then treat it with ointments until it heals.
And sometimes a cauterization is made at the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that controls the limb, and thus the swelling is removed;
and in any case, do not intervene with it unless you are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and medicines are of no use, then cauterize with a cautery slightly deep, according to the thickness of the skin, until the pallor is removed, and its color changed;
then dress it with flour of vermicelli and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and one part of crow blood and one part of lark blood; and mix all together, and bind with a cloth, and let it air in place until it is healed.
the treatment of a sore using cauterization
When a sore begins to appear and you wish to stop its progress, then cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle around the entire perimeter of the sore.
And still the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer;
and yet I do not think this is good, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen before.
And it is more appropriate to cauterize around the area with a cautery known as "circulus," as we have said in many discussions about cauteries.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it delays death either due to the excess it produces or because of the age of the patient when they are infirm (that is, too old), and there is little blood, or because of the time. and if you wish to hasten its end: Then cauterize around with many small cauterizations by pricking; then let it be thus. For she will hasten to kill.
And if you wish to pierce it completely with the cautery, then heat the cautery as follows:
And place your hand in the middle of the illness called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and make the cautery such that the patient feels it externally in such a way that the course of the pus is alleviated.
After the treatment until he is perfectly healed.
There is another kind of illness called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a rotting of the limb, for it consumes the limbs as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see this disease in a place that can withstand fire cauterization together, then heat the cauterizations slightly small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease;
then cauterize from all sides until you reach all the corruption, and leave nothing of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Then leave it for three days, and apply the treated areas ground with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption is gone.
After the treatment of ointments that generate flesh.
And if after three days you see no healthy flesh grow, that is good;
and if not, then restart the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted areas.
And this meal has sometimes been treated with cold medicine instead of a fire cautery;
but still, the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the treatment with cold medicine in another section: take it when you need it.
of boils that come to the feet Many times it happens that on the feet from outside a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a swollen thing that bruises the foot.
And the cauterization for this disease is according to two methods. That is to say, fire cauterization, and hot water cauterization.
The fire cautery should be heated until it is as hot as the quill of a goose feather, and it should be made of good iron to the size that it can penetrate like a nail from all sides, and there should be fine edges;
then place it very hot on the nail, and wrap your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the base of the nail; and leave it like this for three days until it begins to discharge pus; then apply a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the wound with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until it is healed.
And if they are turned outward from the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery to them; and it is done in the following manner: take a chain of iron or steel, or a pin of gold, and place it on the nail and althea leaves, which are known to remove warts; and place the chain around so that it covers all, then put a little hot water in it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and thus find the warm liquid deep down to the root;
and allow the patient to suffer a little from the heat of the water for one hour; then leave it like that, and it will uproot itself completely from its roots.
Do this one after another, until you have cleaned all those that are on the body, then treat them with salves that generate flesh.
When someone shakes with cold of the nerves, or from a fever quartan or other, you must make them four cauteries, or four on the spine, one caustic between each spine; And for the cautery on the foot, and above the stomach for the olive cautery;
let the trembling continue, and hasten to treat the cold illness.
At times, baths or foul pus-filled sores appear on the surface of the body, which come from large corrupted substances.
when they first appear, it is necessary to make a cautery at each head of the abscess: a subtle cautery from the stem of myrtle, whose tip is touched by fire, or from long aristology root, or a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they do not grow further from then on, but the excesses from which they come are broken off, and they are healed;
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Often there is a great loss of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the outside, or in incising an abscess, or in cauterizing the limb, and similar things; and it is very difficult to stop.
And whenever this happens to someone, quickly place your thumb on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the bleeding stops beneath your thumb, and no more blood oozes out;
then put the olive cauterizers in the fire, several small and large ones until they are all red;
Then take the cautery, whether large or small according to the size of the wound and the place where the artery is located, and apply it to that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood stops flowing.
And if it spurts out when you lift your thumb from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is coagulated;
and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
and know that when blood spurts from the artery, it cannot be effectively staunched by oneself when the artery is large, unless it is done through one of the four methods we have mentioned: by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to constrict blood; and let it be tied and compressed appropriately.
Who will cover up the stench by tightly wrapping cloths or placing burning things upon them, or other similar things, if there is no benefit from it not being done.
And if this happens to someone and there is no physician or medicine available, he should place his thumb on the wound over the vein as we have said, and extend it well until it constricts over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the thumb, but apply cold water frequently and very cold until the blood is constricted and coagulated;
and then proceed to treat those who need cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or hot medicines, and the reasons and causes and instruments and forms of the cauteries;
and I have placed that chapter from head to foot, and in this chapter I will follow the same order so that what one wishes to find is discovered more easily.
And as I begin this, it is necessary, indeed, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die as a result.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for treatment. There are those who become so vexed with their illness that they act slightly mad due to the insanity caused by their disease, and from the severity of their suffering; one must be afraid of such people.
And among these are those who regain their senses and say: wait, I am cured; and the illness is severe.
You must not consent to those who come to you with such behavior, but place more value in your honor than in desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely about what you are certain of, and from which you can gain respect and praise;
And use prognosis and indications in treating your patients for whom health may be restored;
And this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and praise-worthy memory.
Dear reader, May our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to draw from the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, as it is before the chapter on cauterization, which I have described from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the head of the child is compressed too forcefully;
and sometimes it comes for reasons that are not known.
And I have never seen this illness except in children, and in all those whom I have seen it led quickly to death; and for this reason it seems to me that I should leave such treatments.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not support it;
and the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the phlegm, between the heart and the bone;
and the procedure is such when the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you should cut a wide incision in the head;
and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture can flow out;
and here is the form of the spatula:
If the swelling is larger, and the abscesses are bigger, then make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is out of the bone, and you see the creases of the head open on each part, and the liquid jumps when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: it is necessary for you to cut three incisions in the head according to this method:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture outside. After cleaning the incisions with cloths and powders, and putting wine and oil on them, leave it like this until the fifth day;
then untie it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head be cleaned regularly, and give the patient dried meat to eat which contains little moisture until the limb is healthy and healed.
And another way of incising is to look at where the abscess is clearly swollen, and the gathering of the pus;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut then there where the abscess is clearly visible, and the accumulation of pus, and make the incision according to your ability;
and be careful not to cut the artery; and if blood flows so that the patient dies from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
When someone falls ill with a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or head, and the illness is longstanding, and medical treatment does no good, then the last remedy is cauterization with those who will cut the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you are to cut the veins, that the patient lie with his head behind him; after which you rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then have the patient pull his neck against the entire cloth; then look where the veins lie, and their places are behind the ears, and they are easily found there;
then mark the places with a needle, then cut both veins with a sharp knife from two sides, until the vein reaches the bone, and do this along the width of the head.
And if you wish, place the spatula beneath the artery and the cloth above, cutting as II must across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood spurts upwards continuously forcefully.
And if the artery does not become visible to touch, then measure a space of three fingers, then mark it and cut down to the bone;
and the amount of blood that should be let out is six cyats, and perhaps a bit more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the fullness of the artery;
then examine the wound: if there is any ragged edge of bone, cut it so that abscesses do not form, then clean the wound and bandage it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
of migraine When old migraine comes with acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and an ancient overactive sode and similar things, and it is treated by medicinal methods and all this does him no good, then we extract the arteries of the temples and apply cauterization, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient should place their fingers in the hair at their temples and feel the artery there, for it beats distinctly, and it can be felt easily except in some people who are too cold;
and if it is responded to, the patient should strain their neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and wash the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible; then take the spatula of which this is the form: then shave the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it up towards the incisions, and carefully separate it from the tissues that are beneath each part;
and if the artery is delicate, turn it with the tip of the hook, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of two fingers. For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow completely.
And draw out blood from six places, up to three times;
And if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that no corruption comes before the healing of the wound, and to prevent the outflow of blood;
Then cut away the excess between the two ties at that same moment, and then, if you wish, apply the cautery with a hot knife to the skin until the flesh is severed;
and this is the safest procedure if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm constitution. For cauterization helps to stop bleeding: it is of greater help for stopping bleeding.
For the extraction of arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place well-made tents over it;
and when they are unwrapped, ensure that medicinal powders that promote flesh growth and tents are used until it is healed;
and if the artery continues to bleed as you work, hasten to cauterize where you apply vitriol and hold it with your hand until the bleeding stops; and if you do not have it available, press your thumb on the area until the bleeding stops, and rinse the area with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and hold it as necessary;
There should be a space of about one finger's width between the two blades, and then when you have marked the two places, place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and keep them apart between the two blades because they should not be joined together throughout this cautery;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And for the one who is weaker and lighter in the extraction of the artery, you should cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery on two sides, but make the cuts well apart to preserve their heat longer. For when the instrument is too cold, it holds less of its heat.
of tears When the tears from the eyes come down from the veins that are on top of the head due to heat, and it does no good with any medicinal cure you apply, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel a tremor in the forehead as if shivering; And when the eyes are swollen and moist so that the hair on the eyelids falls out, and the eyelids are heated, and burned by the heat of tears, then this treatment is necessary. And the ancients called it "contusion treatment," and it is that you make the patient who has this illness shave the hair from his forehead, then you make three incisions on the forehead equally according to its length;
And the ancients called it "contusion treatment," and it is that you make the patient who has this illness shave the hair from his forehead, then you make three incisions on the forehead equally according to its length; and let one of the incisions be made in the middle of the forehead down to just above the nose, and the other two on either side above the eyes, and be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on either side above the eyes;
and move your hand away from the connection of the two mandibles, and let each incision be the length of three fingers across the joint;
and prepare a piece of sponge and much cloth to wipe the blood, then place the spatula gently on both sides as shown in this form:
from the incision that is near the temple to the second incision; and peel off all the skin that is between the two cuts to the surface of the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatula. Insert into the first groove the instrument called "cultellaire," and it is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other side it is smooth, not sharp, and this is its form:
And place the cutting edge towards the flesh of the heart, and the smooth side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle groove.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it reaches the one that opens in the skin, and then do the same on the middle incision until you reach the other side.
And then draw out the blood evenly, and press the area to expel the collected blood;
Then place a piece of old cotton in each crevice, and apply cloths moistened with wine and oil and pitch, and guard against the formation of foul abscesses;
And on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply a large poultice of boiled water, then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until he is healed.
When someone frequently suffers from acute catarrh, and you see the eyes swollen and small, with weakened vision, and the eyelids burned; and the hair falls out, and on the head it causes severe pain like malaria, and the patient sneezes; then you can tell from these symptoms that those matters and that catarrh come only from many veins, and if the physician treats what is there, this is correct.
And it is that you instruct the patient behind their forehead, then make a large incision across the forehead, and another at the back of the head. And start from the fissure of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go until it reaches the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then separate between the two lips of the fissure and place old cotton there, and bandage with linen; Then lay on top wet cloths in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscess;
When it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with things that excite growth, which make flesh regenerate.
In such a manner: Take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to regenerate flesh throughout.
of the obstruction of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: For seeds, for beasts, for stones from mines, or similar things such as iron; For seed, such as peas, beans, and lentils; For things that flow, such as water and pus and similar things.
When a stone or any other substance that does not fit into the ear and does not grow in the ear falls into it, place the ear towards the sun.
If you see the stone, then drop a little bit of violet oil or cumin oil, then proceed with its removal; and make them sneeze with spices, and plug the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear above.
Much heat comes from this treatment;
and if it does not produce heat, then gently extract the pus with fine forceps, which is done as follows:
If it flows out freely with the forceps, that is good;
if not, then carefully extract it using a fine needle with a small incision;
and if it does not flow out even then, make a thread of linen and insert the end of the thread into the ear canal firmly, and plug around the thread with soft wax so that no air can enter through the thread; then pull it out forcefully, as much heat often comes out as we have said;
and if it does not come out in such a manner, take the glue that birds use, and put some instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and place a little cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it may be, and draw it out.
And if it does not come out from all the things we have said, then hurry to cut the ear as for an abscess so that the pus may flow, and relieve spasm;
and the manner of cutting is that you first let blood from the patient's head, and draw out blood according to the measure of his strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear into the fat or dependent area; and let the incision be as moon-shaped, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it quickly into your mouth;
and continue the treatment until he is healed.
And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction;
and if it cannot come out, then administer this salve thinly according to this form: and administer an incision of that tumor.
But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to moisture from the ear, until you have done this many times;
then extract it with fine forceps and with suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In acute cases where water enters the ear, the patient should use sneezing with pepper first, and plug the ear with old cotton. And lie down on the side where the water is. if it comes out because of that, it is good.
if not, take many stones according to the length of your thumb and light, and heat them a little in the fire; and place them in the patient's ear one by one, and let them come out from under his foot on the other side, and press with another stone upon the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop placing stone upon stone until the water completely exits, and thus it will all come out;
and if you wish, take some rush grass, and insert one end into the ear, and set fire to the other end until the softer part of the grass is burned;
Then perform another incision on other veins until all the fluid has drained out, as we have said regarding stones.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small, such as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the section.
but if it is large enough to be felt, then treat with forceps for its extraction; and it is the easiest thing to remove that can be in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section and in treating distillations, and if the treatment is ineffective, then you should examine the ear in sunlight: If any worms are visible, remove them with fine forceps, and if none are seen, take the chain of which this is the form:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And insert the finer end into the ear according to the amount of pain felt by the patient, then proceed gradually with the chain. Do this repeatedly until all the worms come out.
And if they do not come out willingly, plug around the chain with cotton as I have said for stones;
and if they do not exit as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have used for worm expulsion, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations;
and then pour your oils and medicines into the ear with all this equipment, as you see here in the form: And whether it is of silver or brass, make it narrow with small holes, and place it above to let the liquid drip through;
and to aid the dripping into the instrument made of brass for this purpose, if you wish, take a scraper and wrap it around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish into the tube, and place the tube in the ear;
then press into the scraper with all the cotton, and squeeze your hand gently until the oil drips down to the bottom of the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and let the distilled liquid be heated over fire as one would distil it into the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
of the obstruction of the ears
Some children are born without any holes in their ears;
and this same thing happens to adults due to the closure of a wound, or from flesh grown inside the ear, and these obstructions sometimes occur deep in the ear, so that one cannot see them;
and sometimes the liquid exits the hole clearly, and one can see it well.
The one that comes in deeply, if it cannot be seen, is a severe healing in many conditions, and for the one that can be seen, you should place the patient's ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the ulcer clearly, then proceed with this treatment as described in this section:
And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind, so as not to touch the ear;
if the ulcer is of flesh from the ear, then hold it with fine forceps and scrape gently until all the tissue is removed.
And if the wax is placed in the ear, take a fine razor and warm it slightly over the fire, then place it on the flesh of the ear.
If you feel the waxiness where the patient feels pain in the ear, pierce gently, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear;
then place in the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and apply the Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until the wound is sealed, then take a tent and apply it with rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on top;
and if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary to remove the tent and apply another tent moistened in cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling subsides; Then treat him until he is healthy.
And if bleeding occurs, plunge a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the treatment of hemorrhages.
This eyelid that comes in due to moisture and becomes dry, you should extend it with tweezers and forceps, and cut it from a spatula at its root; then place vitriol powder over the area.
And if there is no skin covering it, cauterize with a fine lentil-shaped cautery, and after the incision, apply a dressing.
and it often needs repair, as some of its roots remain. and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
from the hailstone Often come in the eyes things that resemble hail in form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hailstorm," and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below the eye. the work is such:
the work is such: take care if the hailstorm moves from one side to the other, and it is easy to know this.
Then make an incision widely, then gently scrape each part, then take it with forceps, and remove it.
if you cannot remove it without piercing the eye slightly, do not worry about harming the patient;
and if the wound is large, sew it up with stitches, and treat it until it heals;
and if it is small, do not use force, for the ointment will heal it quickly and regenerate flesh.
And if the grain is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper over, and extract the grain with tweezers, and scoop and press from both sides;
and if the paper is pushed away by the incision, it does not matter;
and when the grain is removed, wash the eye with salt water, and treat the area that regenerates flesh until the patient is healed.
of the grease of the eyes Exinach is a grease that forms on the threads of paper above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it greatly troubles their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes;
and because of this they lie down immediately on their beds and sleep, and their papers under their eyebrows are moist, which swells and appears covered with the exinach that is apparent in the eye. And when you press the area with your thumbs and feel the exinach between them.
And the method of treatment is that the patient places their head in your lap;
and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach contained in each part, and place it over them; And press on your two sides from both parts so that the extremity is assembled within the circle;
Then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp scalpel a narrow incision, and let it not be larger than the wound made when opening a vein;
And cut through the skin deeply until you reach the extremity; And in many positions, the extremity comes from the incision, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract it then in one piece with a torn cloth between your two hands from the outside, and turn your hand right and left until it is spread out;
And guard that you do not insert into the fissure, that you do not come to the entire socket up to the eye, that you do not injure it.
And if the extraction does not begin at the start of the fissure, enlarge the fissure slightly until it begins.
Then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths with oil and water, and place them on the site, and bandage it.
And there are such people who grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then treat him until he is well.
And if he comes to the place of an abscess that is hot, treat him with soothing plasters until he is well.
of the hair of the eyebrows When hairs grow attached to areas other than where nature intended on the eyelids, and they are irritated, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases such as habitual tearing and inflammation of the eyelids and conjunctiva, until it becomes a reason for the destruction of the eyes;
and the treatment follows according to four methods: or by cautery with fire altogether, or by medicine according to what is before in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by canes, as I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the eye socket with your left hand;
if it is turned, that is good; if not, then insert a needle along the entire length of it; and do this near the margin of the eye socket where the hair grows among the hairs, and pull the thread along the entire eye socket, and then turn it with a scraper;
Then make an incision on the part beneath the skin, between the attached hairs, covering the entire spatium, from the large joint to the small.
Then extract the thread and place beneath the skin a small pad of cotton and linen, then apply over the skin a figure of incense, such as the leaf of myrtle, and whatever else is needed according to the amount you wish to lift the skin that is prescribed for all.
And if there is need to cut away a great quantity of the skin according to how much the skin has softened;
Then make the incision over the entire spatium along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the large joint to the small; And let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the lancet into one of the two corners of the wound, then scrape it all.
Then sew the two lips together with a needle and fine linen thread, wipe away the blood, and apply a poultice of excess flax to both eyebrows with any sticky substances if you wish to do so.
And if not, do not worry about it, then leave the stitches in for three or four days.
Then treat the wound without stitches with drying and constricting substances, because the skin around the wound rises suddenly and comes together on its own, but stitching is slow (as the ancients say), and this work should be done without fear. and there is another manner:
and there is another manner: and it is that you cut the stone in a shape similar to the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, by three ounces separated according to the form which is here:
Then cut those which rise above the smaller parts equally according to the shape which is here:
And if you are unable to hold the pliers and the pieces are not even, then take a needle with one thread, and place it in the opening; and place one thread next to the large artery, and the second thread next to the small one, and tie them together equally;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have cut, as we have described, then stitch together the two edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed;
And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with plaster and similar soothing ointments;
And sometimes the hair on the skin is turned back:
It is necessary to use what we have said about incising;
but the suturing in one case and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of canes follows this form: and it is that you turn the skin and make an incision according to what I have said, and then make two canes by hand, and two fine sutures as long as the skin and as wide as the spatula is; and cut between two shoulders where you hold the threads;
then carefully join one to the other above what protrudes from the eye's membrane, and pull apart the two tendons of each part firmly; and leave it like this for several days, and the skin which is pulled apart will die, become blackened, and pus up until it falls off on its own.
If it delays, cut it with force, then treat it until it is healed;
and when the wound is closed, and if the membrane is raised, and the hairs will no longer prick;
And this is the form of the two chains that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The work is such that you take a fine needle, and insert the thin silk thread underneath; then assemble the heads and tie them together finely, and let the length of the threads be one palm;
then arrange another fine silk thread in the socket briefly, and tie the ends of the thread gently;
then have the patient place their head in your care;
and place it near the sun so that the work is clearly visible, for this is delicate and intricate work; then insert the needle throughout the socket at the base of the hair adjacent to it, and pierce through the membrane quickly as you pull it over the natural hair;
Then remove the hair up to the wound, and insert that hair into the wound if there is one or two or three or more;
Then withdraw your hand until the hair comes out completely from the wound along with the natural hair.
And if the wound is narrow and the hair does not come out with it, then draw the wound inward along the thread you have inserted until the wound comes out of the opening and you can see it with your eyes;
then draw the wound and the thread out, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair hardens in its place and the flesh grows over.
And if the hairs are short, accompany it with a long hair from natural growth, and raise it alongside one you leave, until it is raised and then lift it.
from the pus of the eye When this disease called "aleacrati" or corruption comes to the eye, there are two ways it can occur:
one naturally, and the other unnaturally.
And it happens by sudden incision, or cutting, or cautery, and by similar things.
And the method of treatment is that you cut open the closure, and separate the edges, and place linen tents inside, and keep it elevated until it heals;
and it is not appropriate to use in the treatment of it things that dry out and constrict. For if you do this, the illness will return worse than before;
but use things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and boil the dew of water and althaea seeds and flax seeds, then mix with some of the melted ointment, and wrap it in a cloth, and treat him with this.
And the goal of your treatment is to ensure that it does not heal in the same form as before;
and the treatments we have mentioned are nothing but methods to prevent this illness from returning in its previous form.
This disease which is called "axacrati" in truth, and its nature and accidents.
The accident comes from a wound and a cut and a cautery and similar things;
and the method of the procedure is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right, so that the thread goes through two parts of the flesh;
then stretch the skin over the entire needle, and cut with a spatula that is one span wide. And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good;
if not, then take a razor and place it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts on the side within the paper;
and let the heads of the two grooves at the two corners of the incision you have made be such that when they are joined, the shape is like the letter called "I" in Greek;
then remove the flesh according to the sharpness of the angle inside, from where the paper was placed, then join the two separated parts together with a thread of wool;
then treat with the remedies we have mentioned for softening and stretching until he is healed.
And if the illness comes from a wound or suture or cauterization, then you must make an incision cleanly between the hairs of the paper, as was described before; Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and the work should be done according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare their treatment with all their power to restore the figure to its natural form;
and the patient himself, according to what is required of work and instruments in various conditions.
When this soldering occurs in some people in such a way that the paper above is soldered with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform their natural tasks, then you should insert the point of a razor below the paper, and lift it up;
and hold the forceps, until you cut that which is attached to the fine spatula, which must not be too sharp or too blunt, so that the patient cannot bear for the overly sharp spatula to scratch the eye;
and let your incision, where you peel off that assembly, be slight, so that the membrane returns according to its natural form;
and when all of that assembly is healed, sometimes they use salt water to rinse the eye, and lift it with sweet water, and apply ointment;
then place between the membrane and the eye a pad of linen, and apply to the eye moistened wool soaked in an abundance of egg; And after the third day, use the poultice and moist things until he is well.
Know that the nail grows in two ways: it is nervous and similar to hard skin, and another that is not nervous, but resembles white frozen moisture, such that when one touches it with iron and thinks to grasp it with forceps, one cannot.
And both kinds begin near the large tear duct and grow little by little until they cover the entire sight, light, and movement of the eye.
And the method of incising is that the patient should place their head on your lap, then proceed with the eyes. and lift the paper with your hand, then trim the nail at the edges of thin lining, and place it above; then take a needle, and put on it horsehair, or cowhair, or oxhair, and strong thread; and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it under the nail, then pierce it completely with the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and place it above, and shave off all the hair from the side of the nail that covers the almond and the silk to the tip, then cut the remaining part at the root of the finger as finely as possible with small forces, and leave the natural flesh of the finger so that by the incision no pus comes out habitually;
and sometimes the nail is attached to the bone alone, and by thread, as we have said; then the skin is removed from all the spatium, which is as follows in form:
And be careful that the spatium does not touch the tough membrane and tear it, and that the probe is not punctured;
and after the incision, sprinkle a little powdered sulfur and some lotion made of litharge into the eye, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not attached to a nerve and you cannot insert a needle, and the probe cannot enter, this condition of the nail is often treated with various medicines;
and grow as I have described in the division, and if you wish to cut them, let the patient's eye guide, and take a small, sharp spatula according to this form: And raise the nail gently above, and if you see that it thins slightly and the pus presses against it, then drop from your mouth into the eye a lotion made of litargirium and red collyrium ground fine, and plug the eye until the next day;
If anything is contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then treat it, and first heal the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume work as before, until it is healthy.
then proceed with the other work according to this same method until it is completely removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the eyelid harms the eye severely, then suspend it at the corner and cut part of it but not all, so that no more tears come from the wound;
Then sprinkle on the eye a red collyrium made of litharge.
In some people's eyes, red flesh sometimes grows, covering the pupil and restraining over the whites of the eyes, turning them outward, and it looks like a purple flower.
The procedure is that the patient should place their head on your hand, then you work on the eyes, and carefully remove all that flesh with appropriate hooks, and support it with strength;
Then cut the first layer of tissue, and keep cutting with the scraper until the end, and be careful not to injure the eye during the procedure;
And let the incision be made with a spatula as we described for nail cutting and small forceps from which the tissue is removed, as the form after this chapter demonstrates;
And when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply the juice of boiled seeds or pour red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and place on top a piece of cotton soaked in egg white, so that it may be secure from a hot abscess.
And if anything remains and the blood flows out, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave the dressing and treat the hot abscess with things that calm it.
Then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do when flesh is applied to the eye in this manner.
However, it is necessary that you lighten the treatment of each weak eye according to the natural way; and from the accidental path, in work with iron;
and do not place your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb can bear the work.
Red veins that cover the eye cause discomfort in its function and weaken the eye all day.
Therefore, first you must check if the eye, in which there is a thorn, is protruding, and there is no other illness except for the thorn; then treat it in this manner:
instruct the patient to place his head on your lap, then suspend those veins along the entire vein according to your wisdom, and let the veins be delicate twice according to this form:
And let two needles be graduated in the body according to this form:
then when you treat the eye, gently compress those delicate veins, and wipe away the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins recede from the eye;
and be careful not to touch the eye with the tips of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon facing the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not miss any veins;
and when you have done this, apply green and red collyrium to the eye to dissolve what remains of the cataract.
And if you are unable to collect everything at that hour, apply a poultice to the eye with soothing ingredients for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is relieved and there is assurance of no hot abscess, then restart according to this method as mentioned before until it is healed.
and this is the form of the forces:
The physician calls this type of ulcer "arissati":
when you treat it with cautery and hot medicines as I have said before, and it does not heal, then there is pus inside that you must incise at the abscess site where it should be opened, and drain all the moisture that is inside until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove it with all the instruments of which this is the form;
and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made of fine iron for the head to rotate, and it should be pointed like a file as shown in the present form:
And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is resolved;
and do this several times, then restore the site with medicinal extracts.
if the flesh is joined and new flesh grows, and the body of the bone is united, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew and is not abscessed, and no bad incident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
if not, then there is another condition to bring the fistula to the hole near the navel according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicinal acids, and when it is uncovered take one leaf according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and the shaft should be slender until the top as shown here:
Then place it on the bone near the cheekbone, and move your hand away from the eye by one finger's width, then turn completely with the force until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it as the wind enters if he holds his hand over his neck.
Then restore the area with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the areas, remove the matter from the neck. It is easier for the patient.
When the eye is fully open and there is no disturbance or reduction in vision, then you must bandage the patient.
Then treat it, then apply suction cups without causing injury to draw out fluids, then place on the eye a dressing made of cedar, aloes, incense, and myrrh, and then strain the eye, and cover with bandages and cloths.
And the method of cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and fold each in four, and then place one upon another according to the quantity that the eyes require;
then stretch them over a hard bandage formed, and reuse the suction cups to suck without injuring;
then remove the suction cups and leave the eye held tight day and night, and if the ligatures loosen, you must hold them very firmly;
then remove the ligature after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it is good;
if not; Then restart the plasters and the cloths and the bandages and the cupping glasses until he is healed.
from the rupture of a woven membrane When disruption comes in the uvular membrane, it is opened, and pus flows from the paper-like tissue like resin seeds, and it is terrifying to see;
then if you see it necessary to cut, the procedure is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part below up to where it joins above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the part near the tear duct; and you pierce there, and leave the first needle in place according to the position;
then cut the area of the double thread and tie a part of the uvula around it tightly, then remove the needle and place on the eye moistened wool soaked in an abundance of egg;
and leave it until the seed falls with the grape, then treat the eye with comforting remedies until the wound is healed;
and sometimes the wound is restrained by the grape on all sides with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
And if the eye shows significant symptoms, pierce it with a fine spatula that comes in perfectly aligned with the eye, and direct the cloudy fluid out and let the eye descend immediately;
then extract it until it is healed.
This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but fluid that has gathered in the eye, resembling water descending, and it is not actually water;
And the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take his head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the brow come up to your eyes; then let it be fixed, and do not allow it to descend, and clear the patient's vision so that he can see things as before;
and if it does not descend properly, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the brow is not prepared as we have said.
seat the patient between your hands, then take a fine speculum and cut through the transparent membrane along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the transparent membrane and the cornea, until the brow rises;
And when it is issued, drop in the eye hot honey mixed with honey, or hot fenugreek boiled with honey, then treat it further until it is healed.
for the waters of the eye We have described the appearances of the fevers in the division, and what is necessary for puncturing them; act according to health.
It is necessary for you to seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light to avoid sunlight, and hold the healthy eye tightly.
then place the eye patch on your left hand if the eye is left, or on your right hand if the eye is right;
Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called almagda, or with your left hand, if the eye is right;
Then place the tip of the instrument beside the cornea by the thickness of a thread on that white part of the eye near the inner corner, then insert the instrument called almagda forcefully, and turn your hand until it penetrates the white part of the eye, and feel when the almagda reaches an empty space;
and it is necessary that the length of the path of the almagda be exactly the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the dark part; and this is the crown of the eye;
you will see the bone through that membrane due to the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument up to where the fluid is, then express it gradually one way after another.
If the water flows now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting for a moment, and if the fluid rises again, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly placed and no longer rising, then gently extract it by rotating your hand little by little;
and then add a bit of honey water to it, and lift the eye out from there. Then place over the eye plugs made of linen soaked in rose oil and an abundance of egg whites, and bind it with a healthy eye.
We, and those of our time, apply it mixed with egg whites in abundance.
And if alum cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are people who have eyes that are too hard, then you must use the instrument called "alberit," of which this is the form:
And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but act carefully, then insert the instrument as we have said;
and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a doctor coming, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
and let him be free of all movements, and give him light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and bind him according to his condition until the third day;
then untie him in the same dark house, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day;
and it is not appropriate that you do this during the hour of treatment or immediately after incising, but it is necessary to delay this, because the blood rises quickly.
If abscesses come, you should open the eye before the seventh day, and direct it according to one who treats abscesses;
And when it is alleviated, then open the eye and place a small piece of gold over it for some days, and keep it in a dark room immediately.
And then leave the house gradually, and return to his usual activities.
And know that no disciple should intervene in this case. And one came to us from Yrach who told us that in his country they make small lancets for drawing off fluid, but nevertheless I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; And by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almonds, so that those who do not recognize them see them;
and they should be made of pure silver: And let the heads of these be of the same subtlety, and the rear in three acute angles.
Sometimes the newly born cartilages appear in various shapes, some of which seem to have many legs like scorpions;
and there are some in which the cartilage is enlarged with a red hue, and there is underlying healthy cartilage of good color. In the case of the underlying cartilage that is not enlarged, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
In the case of the underlying cartilage that is not enlarged, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and work his nostrils, and throw the splinter out of those parts, and draw them forth; then proceed as you can sustain the sharp subtle spitum on one side, until you know that the flesh is completely removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be cut, then scrape it out completely with all the fine instruments gently, so that nothing remains. and if it overflows due to the abscess, then treat it as is appropriate;
and if these are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize until the blood is congealed and all the flesh is removed, then apply to the nose easily and quickly with vinegar or wine. If the urine works, and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that he is healthy;
and if the moisture does not reach as it should, know that there is flesh on the bone above, where the instrument cannot cut:
then you should insert a slightly thick linen thread, and tie it by hand, with each knot spaced appropriately; and place the patient's thread in their nostril as far as possible, and draw it out through smelling until it comes out inside the mouth;
and many times children at school do this, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it;
Then hold the end that comes from the nape with one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and pull them one after the other while observing us who are in the thread.
Do this until you see that the threads have corrupted the flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before;
Do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrupts all that remains of the flesh;
and then put a piece of lead in the nose for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them;
and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, in which one distills oils and medicines through it:
And whether it is made of silver or copper, it resembles an open lamp, like a chain, and the conduit is similar.
and if you prefer, make a closed chain, and let the instruments be full for purging the head;
and it should have a handle at the top to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh upon the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the head of the nose, and it grows until it becomes large, appearing as a visible object when looking at it;
And for this reason it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and remove all hair, then place upon it the cautery or burning medicine;
and if you delay cutting it until it is large, be wary if it is hard, of dark color, and if the patient has poor sensation:
do not touch it with iron because it is an embedded abscess, for when you cut it even once, it brings great harm to the patient;
and if the abscess is soft to touch, not of dark color, and you see that it can be entirely cut, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the area with dry and constricting substances.
Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these cartilage works, it benefits little, except in some men.
It is therefore necessary when this happens to some person, to look if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then sew the two lips together in one seam, and care for it until it is healed;
and if the lips are already separated from both sides, then you must cauterize all parts of their flesh until they bleed, then bring together the two lips in one seam and bind them, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood on it, and grind incense; and apply a piece of soft or another adhesive plaster over the powders, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
The method of stitching is such that you bring together the edges: using needles, as we have said in the stitching of the abdomen; or using thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
In some people, there is an abscess in the lips that is hard and resembles grain seeds, some smaller and some larger;
then you must turn the lips inside out, and cut into each knot, take it with forceps, and remove it from each part;
then apply the area with vinegar after grinding vitriol, until the blood is coagulated;
And then lift the skin, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
Many times, tissue grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus";
it is necessary that you grasp it with forceps, cut it at its root, and let the blood or fluid flow;
then apply vitriol powder or other astringent and drying powders to the area;
and if that tissue returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it a second time and cauterize it: it will not return after the cauterization;
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, unpleasant and rough scales; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and worm-eaten, so that the decay reaches the gum, and the tooth becomes foul-smelling;
it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands, and place their head in your lap, and remove the teeth or scales that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do for the blackness and greenness, and for the yellow and other stains, until they are clean;
and if what is there at the first reason is removed, it is good; if not, then start again from the second day and the third, until you have it all right;
and know that the teeth require various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work shows, because the remover used to pull out teeth has different shapes than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay pulling it as much as you can, because one must not do this hastily; For this is a very high substance until there is no excuse for scraping.
Then when the patient is constrained to pull, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth causing pain. Many times the pain leads the patient to believe it is from a tooth, and they pull the healthy tooth; and the pain does not leave because of that, until the bad extraction is corrected, for we have already seen this happen with these patients;
and when you are certain of the painful tooth, it is necessary to cauterize around the tooth thoroughly with strong spatumile to protect the gum on all sides;
then move it with your forceps to the two sides gently, little by little, until it is well loosened, then firmly secure the forceps; And let the shoulder of the patient be between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After extract the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out forcefully, take any of these instruments and push into each side gently, and move it as you did first.
And if the tooth is pierced and damaged, you should fill it with cloth where the hole is; and if you grasp it gently with pliers, so that it does not break when being grasped;
and you must carefully work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be very careful that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and return to the patient due to the mischief of the root greater pain than before.
And be careful that you do not act as the ignorant surgeons do, who in their hurry and boldness sometimes break the tissue, and do not achieve what we have described;
but they sometimes cause great illness due to the roots that remain, or because of the damage they cause to the flesh, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is extracted, wash the area with wine or hellebore and salt;
and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply ground vitriol to the area;
and if that does not help, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments used to extract teeth first should have long points and thick handles, so they do not double back when you are extracting the tooth;
and these are the forms: And let them be thick members so that they do not bend at all, and let them be of well-made iron, and let them be toothed to hold the hairs.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the wound, you should place cotton soaked in butter on it for one or two days until the area is softened, then use the pincers called "algefri," which make the head look like a bird's beak;
and they should be made inside like a file, and this is the form:
And if the roots do not come out with these pincers, you should expose the flesh all around the root and apply the instrument called "althali," which is a plane, and this is its shape:
And let it be thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through this, it is good;
if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms follow hereafter:
And if one assists with this instrument that has two prongs, of which here is the form: and other instruments which are mentioned before in the ratio of teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large tongs, of which here is the form:
And let this instrument be such that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of bone are; and also other instruments, which are not counted;
and the wise masters find their instrument by themselves according to what their work and the illness shows them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of cases; and if one breaks the cartilage or other bones, it may rot, so they seek among the instruments that I have mentioned, which are necessary, and aid in gestures, about which this is the form:
And let them be large and well-secured to hold the bone, so it does not escape, but can be held and removed;
and then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, remove it entirely with this instrument:
When a tooth appears not according to its natural form of the body, and the shape is ugly, especially in maiden women, then you must know if the tooth has grown after another tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot smooth or file it:
then remove it; and if it is between the tooth and the gum, then take this instrument which has the shape described here, and it resembles a small beak, and let it be sharp at its tip:
And cut it bit by bit over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to move the others, and if it appears that you can file it, then file it with a tool like this one whose form is shown:
and it is like the edge from which needles are made;
and file the tooth little by little each day lightly, so that it does not move until it falls out;
then the surface should be smoothed out at the end for any grinder, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, it must be filed down until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or impair speech.
When the teeth in front are loose due to impact or falling out, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without them moving, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, but that is ineffective;
They must be restrained with a gold thread, for the silver thread becomes green and rots, but the gold never changes.
and the thread should be of medium thickness, not too thick or too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you wish to realign the teeth, take the thread and tie it double between two healthy teeth, then place the teeth that are out of alignment between them, whether there is one or more, carefully until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side; then continue wrapping until you reach the part where you started, and carefully and skillfully pull your hand out so that it does not move;
and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the thread with pliers, and join them together, and place them between the healthy tooth so that it does not touch the tongue;
and then leave it so tight as long as possible, and if it loosens or the thread comes off, tighten it with another thread;
and it will remain like this for its entire time, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth and the two bad ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, replace it in its place, fresh for fresh, as we have said;
And do not intervene with anyone who is not wise and patient, and sometimes one makes the shape of a tooth from bone, and places it in the place where the defect is, and presses it as we have said, and waits and serves thus long.
Sometimes this ligature comes from below the tongue or in the nature of birth; or by the accident of a sealed wound;
and the procedure is such that you work on the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your lap, and lift their tongue;
then cut the nervous band widely until the tongue is separated from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knot, which is due to the sealing of a wound, insert the hook and cut through that ligament;
and make sure that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which lies below;
and when you have done so, lift the area with rose water and plantain, or cold water, then place under the tongue a pad of linen;
and let the patient gargle each night so that the area does not seal over.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply powdered vitriol to the area; and if the skin is damaged, then cauterize it with a lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat it further until it is healed,
and if you see it as a dark or black or hard color, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is an ulcer;
and if it is inclined towards phlegm, and there is moisture, then pour on the ointment, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and release it from both sides; and if the sweat affects your work, then apply vitriol ground until it is dissolved, then return to your work until you exhaust all energy;
then lift the place gently and carefully, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
abscesses of the throat At times, lumps appear in the throat which are called "godath," and they are properly referred to as the two tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the section, and if they are not healed, be cautious:
If these abscesses are hard, small in size, and of a dark color, do not incise them with iron.
And if they are red and the base is large, do not incise them with iron, also to prevent excessive bleeding; but leave them until they turn black, and then you may open them, as they will rupture on their own;
and if they are of a white, puffy color and the base is delicate, prepare the instrument for cutting, but first ensure that the abscess is seated and has subsided.
Then have the patient sit facing the sun, and place your hand on their chest, and work around the mouth, and grasp the tongue with your fingers below, from which this procedure is performed;
and let it be of silver or bronze as sharp as knives:
When you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take a lancet and insert it into the core, and pull it out forcefully more than you can.
and draw some piece of cloth with it, then cover the instrument, which is shaped like a probe, as if it were a forceps. and the heads of all these instruments are curved, one opposite to the other, and they are very sharp, and are made of tempered steel or iron.
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, cut it with pliers, of which here is the form: And let it be cutting on one side, and have a name on the other side;
and when you have cut one of the glands, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot, warm, and soothing water, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with warm water, or with cooked pomegranate rinds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stilled; then treat him until he is well;
and sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two glands, so cut them as you would the two glands equally.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that had arisen in her throat, which is to say the tonsillar abscess;
And I had almost completely closed the throat so that the woman could not exhale because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus for one or two days.
And the abscess had risen so high that it had been pierced two inches through both passages of the nose.
I then hurried and inserted an arrow into one side, pushed it out, and extracted a large portion of the bowel;
then I did the same on the other side of the navel, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue;
after inserting the arrow into these abscesses, I drained part of them, and only a little blood came out; and in this way, the passage in her throat was cleared, and she now began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut into that abscess for a long time;
and the abscess would grow back quickly, filling the place that I had emptied, until it became very large;
then I guided it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained without growing;
and I left those parts, and do not know what God did with it after me.
of the eye(socket)
When phlegm descends to the uvula, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";
and when it swells large and round, it is called "uvula".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does no good, and you see that the swollen abscesses are appeased, and she is subtle, then you must cut it open;
and that which is rounded and assembled and is not long; and it is bloody or of dusky color or black, then you must avoid making an incision on it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Then, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, of its whiteness and length, you should seat the patient before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we made mention earlier; Then insert the lancet into the eye, and draw it out from below, and cut with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for cutting the two almond-shaped structures.
And it is necessary that you do not cut beyond the excess that lies outside the natural boundary;
for if you cut more, it will harm the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said about cutting the two almond-shaped structures, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient fears the cutting, then you should use a cautery on the fearful sensation.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp like aqua fortis. And it is that the patient place his head in your lap, and then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and clean it with vinegar-soaked cloths so that it is not too thick or clear; And when using the application of this instrument, which is described here:
And at the top it has a container where the medicine is placed, like the bowl of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye;
and the patient should lie on their side so that the saliva and mucus from their mouth flow into the medicine inside, so it does not go down to the throat, and cover it;
then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it has been absorbed and the movements of the medicine have calmed;
And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medication, and place the instrument along with all the cotton into the vein above, until the cotton adheres to the skin;
And do this frequently until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and after four days or five, it will fall off.
And if you need to restart the cauterization with the medication, then do so, and after the cauterization, wipe around the skin with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what is around it from the medication;
And let it be washed with cold water, and treat it with gargles until it is healthy.
This treatment is more skilled than incision, or the cautery;
if it is treated by fumigation according to this method, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and combine them all or some of them in a pot, and add salt, and boil;
and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot there should be an instrument shaped as follows: And it should be made of silver or bronze, and one end of the instrument should be placed in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the duct until the sore is cured;
After you begin, do it often, until the swelling subsides, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the hot onset of the abscess, for many things happen. and do not do this before the decline of the hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, take a chain and place inside the head a piece of eggshell, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to obstruct the mouth, and this is a good and safe remedy.
Often, a bone or spine of fish gets stuck in the throat, or some other object.
Therefore, you should extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you may move the thing;
and what you do not see and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the food may be cooked in the stomach; by chance, the unpleasant thing will be expelled through vomiting;
or have the patient swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of wool, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then pull it through; and when it reaches its place, it will settle, and then pull tight;
and if it does not come tight as we have said, then take the instrument of flat iron according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, so that no harm comes to it, nor push the bone inside;
and instruct the patient to insert the instrument, so that they may be moved where necessary; If the boil bursts, draw it out fully so that all the instrument is evenly within.
of the blood from the throat
Sometimes the blood is treated as I said in the section, by the care of medicines; and when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient by the light of the sun, pressing the tongue with the instrument that I told you.
And if you see the blood, draw it out completely with a small hook, or with fine forceps suitable for this purpose.
And if that does not work, take a hooked cane and insert it into the patient's throat, then place a hot iron at the hook of the cane, and do this frequently. And if the patient is constantly bleeding.
then take a full glass of cold water, work it in the mouth, and pour it down to swallow, and move it frequently with your hand; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it will flow.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with assafoetida, with the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye;
do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
And the method of the fumigation is that you take a pot with live coals, and cover it with a perforated lid, and in that hole place the stem of the instrument;
then pour in your fumigation, and the patient should place the end of the tube in their mouth, and close it tightly so that no smoke escapes but instead reaches to the blood;
And now the blood will flow out, and if it does not fall, then restart the fumigation repeatedly.
Allow the patient to suffer thirst, and let them eat dirty and bitter things, and do not let them drink water;
And then it will be necessary for her to discharge heat through this management.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the blood, that is, when it can be seen, resembles curved tongs for entering into the throat. and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and there are rough edges like a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot release;
There are many types of abscesses, according to what the memory brings afterward from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size;
and it is in two ways, one of which is in its own form, and from those that hold moisture.
And the second way is for the places where they are on the body.
for abscesses of the head are different from those of the buttocks, and abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And there are abscesses that one must not pierce until the swelling is dead according to its completion;
and there are such that must be pierced when they are hard, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints.
For when abscesses come near the joints, and one lets it remain until it is rotten around, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
When the abscess is near a principal member, and if you delay the puncturing until it is dead, it will harm the principal member;
where it is near the fundament, pierce it thus so that it may die.
and it is not appropriate to pierce an abscess that has not fully digested, except for one near the fundament, so that it does not rot and spread internally, and a fistula forms. and cannot be healed in a short time.
And you must know the time for perforating an abscess that is necrotic according to its completion, which is when the pain is alleviated, and the fevers subside, and there is a reduction in pain and redness, and the softening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And it is necessary that you make a puncture at the most dependent part of the abscess, and where it appears pus;
And let the puncture be along the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, at joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no pleurisy. In cases of bleeding, according to that member.
And when an abscess is in the flesh, it is better to wait until it is confirmed to be fully digested before performing puncture, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before then, the body of pus within will be elongated, and full of much filth; and by chance the lips and depth of it become hardened.
And if there is an abscess that needs to be punctured according to the width of the body, depending on what the limb requires.
And it is necessary that you treat small abscesses with small punctures; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut them open and cover them; when they have become like flags and are softened, it is necessary to treat them as one would treat boils:
and there are some that are split into three corners, and there are others that are cut like the leaves of myrtle, as with abscesses of the armpits;
and there are some where a round incision is made, and other cuts and similar incisions are performed.
Those who have a head, such as a superficial abscess, you must pierce it completely;
and when the abscess is large and there is much pus collected, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at once, but take some of it; then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw some more out afterward; do this gradually over multiple times, until all the pus has been completely drained;
especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or elderly and infirm. For the patient may sometimes gasp when the pus comes out, which might cause the patient to die, and you would not be blamed for it.
Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have punctured the abscess, wash the wound, and check if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a large wound, then apply bandages made of linen or old cotton; and if it is large abscesses, and there are many openings, then you must insert a bandage into each one so that they come together;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have sewn around it, then you must fill it with old cotton or linen lint without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
Then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, then bring cold water and herbs, and wet the cloth with it, and apply it to the bleeding area repeatedly.
And if the flow of blood persists, administer treatment and care, and use the powders that I have mentioned earlier in this book, and if it is winter time, and the place where the abscess is very dry, then you must put up tents and cloths soaked in wine and warm oil;
and if it is in summer, and the place is moist, then you must put on cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said;
and then unbind the abscess and dry it and treat it as is appropriate until it is healed.
And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses:
For I have told you how one must proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
For small boils on the head come in various forms, like the pattern of a gooseberry, and there are many similarities.
There are some that are fatty and of such type where there is moisture as well as pus;
and there are some that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt unless the artery opposes it.
And the work of the loin is such that you should test all the instruments called "entromissoire," of which the forms come next, what they contain.
For if it contains moisture, then cut it open from above along its length.
And when the moisture is drained, scrape away without leaving anything of the skin that contained it, for it returns immediately if anything is left.
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and in ashes, and emplastrize the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who remain from the night shall run these actions.
And then restart the cotton, as before, on the second day, and on the third, until you know well that none remain from the night;
then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess persists in a fatty area, cut it according to this form, lengthwise; and there pour your ointments, and scrape it from all sides, and apply all your treatment to drain it out of the cavity where it lies;
And if the artery opposes this, do as I told you afterward.
And do the same for the abscess if it is stony, and cutting and curing as I have told you.
And when you cut into the stony and moist abscess, it is easier, for they contain little blood. And if there is an abscess on someone's head where there is no moisture, and among these were the abscesses that I treated on the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had touched it, it would have caused as much injury as touching a stone.
In other abscesses that come on the head, especially those that occur at the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the incision should always be made in the lowest position, so that pus can exit easily;
and treat them as is appropriate.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, and sometimes near glands, and in armpits, and at other times they appear elsewhere on the body, and are very large, growing one upon another.
And each scrofula is properly within its own area, such as the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities among these scrofulas.
and there are many similarities among these scrofulas. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malignant and do not want to obey treatment.
in the one that you see has good disposition when touched, and its color resembles the color of the skin, and it is not hard against the neck veins or artery or conduit, and it is not deep;
you should cut it open from above, and skin each part, and extend the two lips of the wound with forceps if you need to, as we have said for head abscesses;
And cut slowly and bit by bit, and be sure that you do not sever the nerve or the vein, and let it not be too sharp nor cutting, so as not to injure the hand, and do not go too far, so that you do not cut what should not be cut.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work on it, place in the wound ground vitriol or some powder that constricts blood flow, and press on the wound; and leave it until the abscess is alleviated, and the wound softened, and begins to discharge.
And when the blood has constricted, then return to your work, until you complete it;
Then inquire with your proper probe if there remain any small scrofulous nodes, and if so, cut them out and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, you must not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall away without harm;
Then pack the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
And if you cut out the whole boil, then you must bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, since there is no excess tissue due to the size of the boil. And you must focus on cutting the root of it, pulling out the core, and sewing as we have said.
And you must focus on cutting the root of it, pulling out the core, and sewing as we have said. Those scrofulas that contain excess fluid, pierce them where it is most apparent;
and pierce them as was said before, in a dependent manner, then apply dressings with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; And when the wound is well cleansed, apply an ointment for healing flesh until it is healed.
The ancient ones spoke and talked about the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who did this, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have lockjaw, it is necessary that the groove in the throat called "epiglottis" be removed; and no help is given by this, because all the veins and the flesh of the patient are affected in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both tonsils.
When the illness is in the windpipe channel, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it between three or four circles with a small transverse incision, between two circles or according to the size of the surface incision, not in the cartilage;
and those places are suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long and thin.
And if the master is fearful, he should stretch the skin of the neck for its entire length, then cut through until he reaches the bone; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the surface as we have said;
and this is demonstrated by the section of the blood vessel from the neck that springs forth at the place which is ruptured, and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed during which strangulation is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew it all up along the cartilage;
then administer medications that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the absence of breath occurs. Then cut off the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malignity of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four; then they commanded to sew up the wound and clean it, until it was cleansed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young lady took a knife and stabbed it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe.
and I was called to treat her, and I found her as if dead.
I examined the wound and found the blood that had come out, and realized that she had not cut any vein or vital organ, only her throat, and the flesh was protruding from the wound.
I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated it until she was healed;
And it did not happen that the lady was red-faced, and she returned afterwards to her disposition;
For that is why I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis one should have no fear.
This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess in the color of a bruise, and it occurs frequently in women;
and it follows two manners: natural, and accidental;
in the natural case, there is no foreign body.
And the accidental case follows two manners, one of which is similar to fat us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; And there is fear, and it is not appropriate to work with fierce force except on that which is small, and the proof and search are throughout the interstice: if you find it as thick as our flesh, and it cannot be moved by any vein, cut it like one cuts nails, and draw it out completely, if there is any of it. and search thoroughly soon, and treat it as is appropriate, until it is completely healed.
There are many ways of nails, of which I will describe all the similarities;
and now it is necessary for me to speak of all the differences that exist between us and them.
I say that sweat and fever come then, until the ebullition is past, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With the poultice there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains herbs, which are its own mixture and match the color of the skin, and begins like a blister, and becomes large;
and they vary in two ways, either fatty or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the classification.
It is necessary when you come to the treatment of the nose that you test and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what their form will be in the chapter which is after.
And the method of examining abscesses is that you take the most moist part that you find in the abscess, and press with your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core, according to the size of the abscess;
Then extract the interosseous bone, and be careful not to damage it.
If moisture flows from the wound, regardless of its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
and if moisture does not come out after the interosseous bone, know that it is fatty, then cut it in a cross shape, and take it with forceps, and lightly scrape each side and be careful to heal the coat where it lies so you can draw it healthy with the thread;
and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then remove it piece by piece so nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the pain will return many times;
and if it remains for a short time, and the blood does not trouble you, then apply the wound with some corrosive powder, and clean the wound, and put on hot poultices to soothe the abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and if the flesh is abundant, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what generates flesh.
and if bleeding opposes you or another method is unsuitable, then hasten and apply the place with powdered vitriol, and let it lie for two days or three, until the wound becomes rotten, and replace it with a decoction of blood. then return to cauterize what remains of the flesh.
See here the forms of the instruments used for insertion, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small;
and there are three squares called "albaret," and one called "brep," and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, for examining the abscesses of fistulas;
and they are also like the needles used to stitch sorcerers, and are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and are better for probing black knots in fistulas;
and there are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The forms of tumors are of many appearances, as you see here:
and there are tumors that have two curves in three ways as well;
and there are tumors that have three curves, and they are also of three ways;
and there are tumors that have two curves, and tumors with only one curve, and they are also of three ways;
And all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these to be used should be sharp, and there are some that only cut in one direction, so as not to slice the skin, for which one does not cut the vein or the nerve;
and of these intermissive ones are the lancets placed in handles so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of abscesses;
and there are three types: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and they are used only in fleshy parts such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas;
And sometimes one makes another instrument small, resembling the rind of figs, in this form, with which one staunches blood: and it is sometimes placed at the site suitable for cutting veins, and arteries, and sometimes follows this large form:
Sometimes the testicles of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much so that they seem like women's breasts;
and remain deformed and swollen, and if one wishes to treat them, it is necessary to apply care according to this form from this line .b. until .g.: then scrape off the fat, and apply a healing medicine to the wound that promotes flesh growth, then stitch together the two edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed;
And if the mammary gland descends, and is softened due to its size as it happens in women, then make two incisions above on the ribs, by two similar cuts; so that one is connected to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B to the line G; then peel the skin that is between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment until it heals;
and if it does not heal, or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to excessive bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in a caustic ointment; and let it remain until he consumes the rest and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
These abscesses that appear beneath the buttocks are hard forms of scrofula with edges, and there are some that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be incised according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.: And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat it with ointment appropriate for healing until it is healed.
And if the abscess resembles a scrofula, then incise it as we have said about incisions for scrofulas, and if the wound discharges pus, then treat it with cautery as we have previously stated.
When the artery is cut, and the skin above it is sealed, abscesses often occur, and the same happens with a swollen vein and an abscess;
and one knows it thus when it is due to the artery, as the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you sense the tightness;
and when it is due to the vein, it appears swollen and protruding;
and it is foolish to incise this abscess, especially when it is near the armpits and elbows and on the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid treatment with iron, and one who has a head injury should also be avoided, and in the case of arterial swelling on the long bone, make an incision above the skin;
then work the area with bandages, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed;
then insert a needle from one side and pierce it to the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you for the extraction of the two arteries found in the temples;
then puncture the area between the two ligatures with an instrument so that the blood flows out which is inside, and release the abscess;
then apply the treatment for bowel movement, until the stool is liquid; then treat them with appropriate ointment until they are healed;
and if the abscess is near a vein, you must mark with your hand as much of the abscess as you can on the skin, then insert the needle beneath the area marked by your hand, and pierce it, using double thread so that you draw it out from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, with one end of the thread to each of the two threads;
and if you fear that the thread might come loose, insert another needle along the entire length of the thread under the abscess from the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places;
Then cut open the abscess until the excess matter comes out, then cut away the excess from the heart and leave those that are tied.
Then apply a moist bandage soaked in wine and oil, then treat with patches and ointments until he is well.
Just as abscesses occur in the artery and vein, abscesses also occur in the nerves when they are injured, or from excessive labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows and in all places where there are joints, and these are severe abscesses, and their color resembles the skin color, and they cause significant pain.
and when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not throughout the body but rather near the heart;
and it is fixed in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor up or down, and those that are in joints should not be cut with a knife: by chance there might be a contraction; and for those who have it at the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel.
and for those who have it at the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel. If the abscess is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, suspend it with an ounce, and scrape it, then remove it and stitch the wound together, and treat it until it heals.
At times, this occurs in bellies and not elsewhere, a disease called "fungus" due to its appearance, with subtle roots and large lumps;
and there are both small and very large ones;
and I saw a man who had two on his stomach which looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, and they had fine roots, and moisture corroded them quickly.
I cut them out and found one weighed eighteen ounces and the other six, and in performing this work during the incision you must observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the flesh is white and moist with a fine root; cut it with a broad spatula, and have the fire cautery ready at hand.
cut it with a broad spatula, and have the fire cautery ready at hand. For in cutting there often come excessive flows of blood, and if the blood overcomes you, then hasten to use the cautery;
and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision with iron, then take a well-made silk thread, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not stop compressing the silk thread until it cuts through the artery, and cease from further work;
and if the roots are thick, be wary of cutting them directly for fear of the abdomen, but you may safely cut half of it, then use the cautery so that it does not regrow;
Then treat the wound, and take care not to cut the tendon which is of purple color and little sense and milk-white appearance.
For this is an embedded abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers shortly thereafter.
when the wound becomes hot If the appearance of swelling comes from a cautery on a wound or tear on the surface, and it is on the abdomen and some of the bowels are involved, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or from windiness;
and if this is due to the rupture of the surface and the exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the skin, it causes little pain, and is clear from various openings. And if this is due to the issue from the intestine, then it becomes more diverse, and when one presses on both sides, it swells up, and then returns, and perhaps it is congested, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and for hard work.
And if this is due to moisture, it is a minor issue, and clearly apparent when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain.
And if it is due to blood, these signs clearly indicate large and hard abscesses, and they are set according to a certain quantity; And if it is due to windiness, it is shallow to probe, and the procedure is that you observe whether the appearance is due to arterial blood, or from a vein, or windiness.
And if it is due to windiness, it is shallow to probe, and the procedure is that you observe whether the appearance is due to arterial blood, or from a vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear about it, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the eye, then you must instruct the patient to hold their breath, and lie completely straight, then incise all around the edge; then instruct them to lie quietly in your hands, then go around the place where you have marked with all the spatula, then extend half of the abscess above with the large forceps; Then bind the area tightly with a strong thread or a rope of strong silk, and let the bandage be firmly applied.
Then work on half of the abscess extended over the bandage, and place your index finger there, and seek the intestine. if you find it caught in the bandage, then undo it, and push the intestine back into the abdomen.
and if you find the bowel, grasp it with your finger, and cut away the excess.
and if the artery or vein opposes you, go around them gently, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads outside, and place the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape to pierce.
Then incise the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the wound until it matures, and the dead tissue will come out by itself; when you cut it when it is subtle and ripe, then treat it as necessary, and drain the abscess as we have said;
when you cut it when it is subtle and ripe, then treat it as necessary, and drain the abscess as we have said; and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as necessary, and close the wound.
of the ulcer/gangrene We have discussed in the section the similarities of ulcers, and how one should treat them with medications, and how to avoid treatment with iron;
and we say that an ulcer in the armpit is dangerous, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when ulcers are in places where they can be scraped out like those on the breast, and on the thigh, and in similar areas, they should be completely removed at the beginning;
nor has anyone ever healed it before me.
And when the work is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, you should occasionally purge the patient of black bile;
then make the patient healthy if there is obvious fullness, then position the patient properly to perform the work;
then apply your ointments to the ulcer, and clean it thoroughly from all parts, leaving nothing behind;
Let the blood flow freely, and press firmly with your hand or some object on the area, and if the bleeding from the wound opposes incising the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood is staunched; then treat it further until it is healed.
Of hydropsy We have already mentioned in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the gathering of fluid is formed, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment which is done with medicine, and that which is treated by iron:
and one should not use iron in these two similarities: That is to say, tympanitis and ileus, for these are deadly things;
Therefore, when you treat this appearance of dropsy which is called "eclipsis" with medicines, and the treatment does not help, then look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as coughing and releasing of bowels and similar things; do not use iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient is very strong, and he has no other illness than dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should proceed as follows: lift the patient up on your hands, and have an assistant press the abdomen by pushing the liquid to the lowest part of the belly, then take the spatula according to this form: And let there be cutting from two sides. Use a sharp point, and ensure it is not so deep that it can reach the intestine when inserted, and it cannot be withdrawn;
then check if the edema has spread towards the intestines: if necessary, you should cut three fingers above the navel directly over the groin; and if the edema is due to liver disease, your incision should be three fingers to the left of the navel;
and if it is due to the spleen, it should be on the right, and the patient must not lie on the incision so that the excess fluids do not flow to the weaker area;
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and cut it open, and lift your hand to all the fat between the skin and muscle as when flaying to the quantity of a nail or around.
Then cut into the muscle until the fat comes to the place of eight, and this is where the fluid is, then draw it out, and insert this instrument which has the shape: And it resembles a fine silver chain, and is made of reed or light rush, and has at the middle a small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one elsewhere;
and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writer makes on the feather:
at the top above is the blade, so that when the instrument comes to the tip, it now descends upon the instrument;
empty then half or one third of it, for if you empty more than is necessary at that hour, by chance the patient may die from the spirit's reaction to the weapon, or they fall fainting, or approach death;
but empty according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what the signs of the patient's disposition indicate, and their pulse;
Then draw the instrument and retain the fluid, and it is now retained by the heart which plugs the aperture that is above the diaphragm, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
Then restart the instrument on the following day if you see that the patient is suffering from it, and draw out a small amount of fluid;
Do this for several days, and be careful not to overdo it so that only a little bit of fluid remains.
And if you are uncertain about the patient and leave a lot of fluid in them, then treat them with burial herbs or hot sand, and by sweating a lot or bathing in the sun, and let them drink lots of fluids; And treat with drying medications until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the fluid, as I said before.
Sometimes children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
It is necessary to pierce it immediately with a very fine spatula according to this form:
then place a fine cloth plug in the opening, and secure it for three or four days, and when he wishes to urinate, remove the plug, allow him to urinate, and then replace it;
and sometimes this is not necessary, because the urine that comes from force does not leave it closed.
He whose opening is small should be treated with the cloth of flax as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Those who do not have the opening in its place are defective, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot heal because the matter cannot reach the bone marrow, and this is a serious illness.
And the method of the procedure is that the patient lies supine on their back, then holds the rod and places it as thick as a quill's middle part, so that the hole in the head fits exactly, as is appropriate;
and be careful of bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding as one would stop blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
pimples on the penis Often these ulcers come in the rod, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh;
And there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
You should grasp them with a fine needle, cut and clean all of them, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and foul-smelling, then you must apply a cautery to it.
When you have cut it, and if the dart is in the shaft of the penis, and part is inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the part that is inside first; and when it is sealed, then treat what is outside.
For when you treat it all at once, the head of the penis is not secure and may be pierced, leading to blackening and corruption in the shaft of the penis and the testicles;
It is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of pomegranate peel and vinegar, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then treat with a lunar cautery according to this form:
The cauterization helps with both conditions simultaneously: that is to say, for the hemorrhage and for the corruption;
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary to insert a tube of lead into its canal, and have the patient urinate through it;
and when the hair is irritated at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, whether it results in a wound or an abscess, then you must burn it with a pointed instrument until the tissue is loosened, and free the head of the penis from all sides;
And if this is difficult to discuss, then you must scorch it with some poultice at the top of the shaft and of the blade;
Then carefully separate them between two, and place a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water between them so that they do not adhere again.
Circumcision is not a dislocation of continuity like other wounds; Still, when we perform this act of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the least harmful for their well-being.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the majority of masters and senior practitioners who performed circumcisions around the dawn, and with great force, and all at once.
So bind them tightly because there are two cloths, and by chance one may cut the upper one and leave the lower one untouched. Now there is danger in cutting it again, and the pain doubles, and the healing of the bone is not assured.
and in the healing of the nail, by chance the iron may slip, and ruin the work, and often they heal without needing treatment as I have observed.
Of the cleansing that is done with force to the entire limb of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the force cuts precisely both above and below.
For when you press your hand, cut evenly in one single motion; but make sure the thread is tight around the skin;
And the method of the first procedure is that you make the child, if he understands, think that you are only tying a thread around the shaft, and then you can delight him in all ways that you can.
Then hold him straight between your hands, and place the forceps between your hands or behind your feet where the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
Then place your hand on the shaft and blow at the root, and pull it up until the head of the shaft is in place; Then clean it well of the debris that has accumulated there, then tie the site with a doubled thread, then tie from one pouch to another.
Then clean it well of the debris that has accumulated there, then tie the site with a doubled thread, then tie from one pouch to another. and hold at the two dobs by the second ligature on the pouched part and thumb, then lift the heart quickly and draw the head of the rod. then allow the blood to flow drop by drop, for this is safer; and apply powder and then on top of the powder place a piece of cloth glued with one yolk of an egg diluted with rose water, cooked well and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and treat it again as needed until it is healed.
The form of force for purification is as follows:
the two edges should be sharp and the edges should be as wide as the blade evenly:
the mistake in cleansing is when the pus inside goes to the incision;
then it is necessary that you extend it to your nail, just as the doctors treat an abscess;
and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it to your nail, then hold it with forceps, and then cut it.
And if they exceed three days, and the area below the thigh is swollen, wait until the abscess has subsided somewhat, and then gently scrape it;
cut it as much as you can without harming the area of the thigh, for it will do no harm to that part.
Treat then the wound with powder, which we have mentioned in the chapter on powders, and if one cuts into the heart beyond measure, and it goes too far, it will do no harm;
Treat it then as we have said, until it is healed.
from the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or coagulated blood, or a tumor, or dead tissue, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the section;
and if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is due to a stone that is lodged in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be seated on their knees; and place the feet on the back, extend his belly from above the back, and restrain the patient's thigh as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is pressed to expel the stone upwards, so that the urine is released;
and if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," of which here is the form:
and it should be made of thin silver, as fine as the feather of a bird; and let the tube be one and a half palms long, and thin at the tip.
And the manner of the urine flow is that you take a double thread, and tie at the top a piece of wool or cotton, and put the end of the thread into the syringe;
and trim the excess of the wool and push it up to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and lubricate the bladder and penis with moistened oil and olive oil and cold water;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the body;
then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and feel when the patient senses that the container is empty, but this should not be done if the path it follows is twisted;
Then stretch the wool thoroughly bit by bit, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it forcefully, and let the urine flow.
and repeat the suction until the bladder is empty, and let the patient be comfortable.
When pus or blood comes to the bladder, and putrefaction is assembled there, and you wish to introduce liquids and medicines, use all the instruments which are called "clepsydre," and this is its form:
It is closed, and has three openings: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and the leather covering through which the medication tube is such that it stops up the penis well without addition, so one can draw out moisture and insert when necessary;
and when you wish to administer your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the syringe in the moisture, and draw it out with the extractor that is inside;
So you will draw the moisture to the site, and then firmly set it by pulling it in; The moisture will enter in and reach the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder:
It is of silver or rush, and the head is higher;
and displace it to the side where the ligament falls;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture with which you wish to enema the bladder in it, then tie it between the two breasts tightly with a good strong string, and heat the container of that moisture over the fire;
Then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then pull your hand along the bladder to push all the liquid upwards until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, piercing it roundly; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then attach the circle as you would a sieve, and place inside it what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument;
and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of the stone
We have already stated in the division the manners of stones and their extraction together with medicines;
and I have stated the difference between the stone formed in the kidneys, and all the signs, and which stones one should work to cut; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder similar to how it does in its subtlety;
and there is clear pain, and the patient scratches his penis, and he does this many times, and then it constricts; and in many cases the foundations are weakened;
and the healing of children is easy until they are four years old, and it is very difficult in the elderly, and it is moderate for those who are between youth and old age;
and the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines. For it sometimes obstructs in seeking to remove the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift them up and move them backward so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it sometimes comes out from a higher place;
then have the patient sit between your hands which are prepared behind their thighs so that the bladder is completely tilted downward;
then press and touch inside;
if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall out upon touching with your thumb, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is female, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult male; and insert it into its place, and feel for the stone, and when you sense it with your finger, gently push it towards the bladder neck;
then press with your finger, and push it out where you intend to make the incision.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out his right hand towards the groin, and with his left hand remove the skin that is underneath the groin in the area where the waist is made;
then place the spatula cutting it, which is its shape: And make an incision between the groin and the anus, not in the middle but towards the left side of the navel;
and it should be straight over the stone, and your two hands should immediately be at the anus, and the incision should traverse the area so that it is wide on top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
by chance the pressure is so strong at the base that it leaps forward without effort;
and you know there are some stones with corners and edges: it is difficult to remove;
and there are some that are smooth, like a hawk's talon, and round, from which removal is easy.
For those with corners and edges, make the tool larger;
and if it does not leap forward, then you must clamp with pliers that are like a file at the top, to firmly grip the stone so it does not escape; where you place beneath the eye a curved delicate instrument;
and if you cannot do it thus, enlarge the socket and the aperture, and if blood escapes, then constrict it with vitriol;
and if there are more than one stone, place the larger one at the neck of the bladder first, then cut above it, and pull it out forcefully, and do the same for the smaller ones if there are any.
And if it is very large, you must observe it and make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out immediately so that the wound cannot close;
but still, strive to extract it, or use pincers to break it apart, until you remove it piece by piece;
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, and compress it, and place over it a damp cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then lay the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you release it, wash the area thoroughly with oil and water, then treat it with diafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses and corrosion come to the wound, and clots of blood in the bladder, and thus the urine is retained, which occurs in such a manner that it must be expelled with the urine: insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will rot the bladder.
Then lift the wound of water and ease and healing, and assist it in all ways that you know, until it is healed;
And it is necessary that every time you treat it, you bind the two thighs together, and apply the medicines to the place.
And if the stone is small and it is in the passage of the penis, lodged inside, and the urine cannot exit; then treat it as I say thus, that you cut it many times, for this treatment excuses the cutting. I have already tested this in this way.
Take an iron fork according to this form and have three prongs fixed in one handle:
Then take some thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot move backward into the bladder;
Then insert the probe gently into the shaft until it reaches the stone; and turn the probe gently in your hand within the stone bit by bit until you can pierce the stone from another side;
the urine will soon come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the shaft. It will be broken immediately, and the stone will pass with the urine, and the patient will be cured;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then cut the shaft directly through the stone between the two ties, then extract the stone, and untie the ligatures, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and treat until he is healthy.
of women's stones (referring to kidney stones or similar conditions)
It rarely happens that a stone is formed in women, and when it does occur once, the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
one reason is that the woman may be a virgin;
and the second reason is that one cannot find a woman who knows and will expose herself to doctors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that by chance one cannot find a woman who knows this art of hands;
and the fourth reason is that the stone in a woman is harder by nature than the stone in a man, so it requires a deeper cut, and there is great fear involved. And if necessity arises for this, you must take a wise midwife who knows well, and finding one is difficult, and if you do not find one, pray to God with all your might.
and present a wise woman in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the investigation of the stone; and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the fundament and search for the stone;
and if she finds it, she should press the stone out with her finger, and recommend that she inserts her finger into the patient's vagina and presses firmly with her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, she must gently move the stone from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh;
Then cut above the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the anus, where it is moved, and feel for the stone in that part; and do not move his hand above the stone or below it, and let the waist be slightly bent;
and do not move his hand above the stone or below it, and let the waist be slightly bent; then insert the instrument into the waist, if you feel the stone then enlarge the wound so that the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have spines.
and know the signs to understand the outcome.
And if the blood flows, then place vitriol powder at the site, and keep it there for an hour until the bleeding stops;
Then return to your work until the stone is expelled, and have the instruments that I told you about for extracting stones from people to help in your work;
and if the blood flows and it comes from the artery that is severed, put the powder on the site and bind with cloths and linen, and do not attempt to extract again, and leave the stone unextracted, for the patient might die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work, until the stone is expelled.
Aquous humor is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white substance, which comes from the testicles, contained in the egg;
and it is called "white substance," and sometimes it is properly within the membrane of the egg, so one might think it is another egg; and this is the skin of the penis between the white shaft that we have mentioned;
and this does not occur unless it is diseased. And the formation of this aqueous retention is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and this matter spreads out.
And sometimes it comes from striking the genitals, and this moisture can have many colors: it may be a color inclining to yellow, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more frequently;
and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is on the white shaft that we have mentioned, then the abscesses are frequent, the swelling long like the shape of an egg, and does not reveal the genitals, because there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper tissue, then the abscesses are soft with part of the egg, and because of this, people think it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the eyes and the white membrane, then one can feel it well;
then when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all around the affected area, as its form was described above. According to what follows after the introduction, judge what is within.
And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be bled according to his strength and the fullness of his body;
then lay him on his back on something slightly raised, and place many cloths under him;
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs below the heart.
Then take the spatula and cut the skin of the genitals in a straight line from top to bottom until near the base, and make your incision entirely straight while carefully cutting through the skin down to the white tissue, and peel it off delicately as much as possible.
Then puncture the area full of fluid with a wide incision, and drain out all the fluid, and then apply your forceps, and stretch the tissue upward.
and do not touch the heart of the genitals, but only the skin. Cut through it all or piece by piece carefully for him subtly, that if you do not cut it well wisely, the fluid will return.
and if the eye jumps during your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the operation.
Then sew the two leaves of the groin together at one seam, then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the eye corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspensory, fearing the loss of blood;
Then cut the groin at all the suspensory parts, and extract the eye, and treat it as we have said.
And if heat is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two roots; if you cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put linen soaked in rose oil on the wound;
if you cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put linen soaked in rose oil on the wound; and place another layer of linen soaked in wine and oil over it, and put two cloths on top, and cover with doubled cloth, and tie it securely according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and wrap them with linen strips according to this appearance and sew them together at the waist of the pants, one going from the buttocks up to the back, and the other to the side part;
and the other two heads on each of the two rings, and let all the straps be fastened in the buckle of the bracer;
and sometimes this area is treated with a cautery instead of an iron incision, and you should take a fine knife-shaped cautery, cut the skin over the testicles, and heat it as we have said, so that the white substance containing the fluid is exposed;
take the cautery in this shape, and pierce that white substance with tongs, and scrape it with this fine hot cautery:
And cut in all the ways that you can, until you scrape it all clean;
and guard that the fire does not touch the eye;
and know that this work is safer; and use caution to prevent loss of blood, and be careful with the procedures of cutting;
and if anything goes contrary, such as an abscess or loss of blood or another thing, then treat what is contrary according to what was said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this procedure due to its horror, then administer perforation as I tell you, and when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that aqueous fluid is there, have the patient sit on a raised seat; Then pierce the abscess on the side completely along the entire span of the body, and make the incision along the length of the body;
and let the opening be wide so that all the fluid can run out;
then place cotton on the area, and secure it, and leave it so that the remaining fluid can drain, then treat the wound until it is healed;
and if the white cloth does not allow the fluid to exit from the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a quill or instrument used for treating the fluid in hydropics, as described above;
and enlarge the pit of the wound, and note that the fluid returns after about six months or thereabouts, and when it has gathered as before, thus the patient will live out their days.
Know that during the cutting of this vein there is fear in many cases, for which reason it seems better to let it be.
and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses occur in the body, especially in the groin; and this is due to many causes.
This is known to be due to sour and sharp excess, which spreads in the groin, or from impact;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the skin; and does not feel any pain, and there is a severe abscess;
and by chance, some severe abscesses are fearful and stone-like, and of a bad color, and sometimes they come from the artery or swelling of a vein.
When it is from the artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it is not appropriate for you to touch it.
Those who have swelling from a vein are known by their condition through the expression of feeling when touched with fingers, and one can properly diagnose this and other conditions based on this. And it is that you cut the groin artery, then place the egg above, and draw it out from the white membrane, and release the suspensory of all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already hardened with these new veins, then you must draw out the egg, and cut it.
And if it is air in the membrane, or within what is inside the vessels, then you must release all that cavity, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is at the back, then you must cut it all away, and extract the eye, as we have said.
And when your work is complete, apply the wound with wet wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to bark, with the softening of the groin, and the patient moves very painfully when he goes.
And the treatment for this disease is as well very fearful as the one before, and nevertheless we shall tell you about it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised chair, then place the suspensory below the testicles up to your two hands, and hold firmly the parts near the penis, and stretch them strongly;
then cut open the scrotum with a broad sharp spatula across the parts, until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then insert a needle with doubled thread and tie it at the first place where the vein is, and tie it again to the other end; Then cut them directly in the middle, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted humors;
Then treat the wound as you would others where you insert a boule, so that no vessel bleeds that nourishes one of the testicles;
for by this no harm comes, and if it happens to all the vessels, then it is necessary to draw out the testicles from all the vessels; so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
The occurrence of this condition is due to the section that comes from the syphilis, or the extension on the abdomen in the groin area, because the intestines descend through that opening to one of the testicles;
and this rupture is in the thigh or from extending it, and these two manners come from many causes:
by striking, jumping, lifting heavy loads, or similar actions;
and the signs when it is from extending the thigh are that they occur little by little over a long time, and do not happen suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the bottom, because the thigh is close to the intestines.
And the signs when it is from the section of the cheekbone are that they cause a sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, near the skin, because of the exit of the intestine and the body pulling away from the cheekbone.
And sometimes the intestines descend with the bowel, and it is retained inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when it is compressed.
And in these iron treatments there is fear, for which one should avoid them.
And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to insert his finger into the wound inside the intestines if it can be reached; Then bind around his neck. between your hands, and lift the thighs;
Then stretch the heart above it, and cut away all the skin from the genitals gently; Then insert hooks into the sides of the waist according to what you need to open the wound, and make them such that the eye can pass through;
Then peel off the skin that is above the skin of the genitals, until the white fatty tissue is exposed on all sides;
Then insert your index finger in the area behind the genitalia, between the white fatty tissue that is below the skin of the penis and the second layer of fat, and separate what is behind the penis and between the second layer of fat;
And then move with the right hand inside the groin area, and stretch the white skin upwards with your left hand, and lift the egg across the entire surface towards the waist; And instruct the assistant to stretch the egg upwards and undo those who are tied behind;
And ask your two assistants if there is any part of the intestines wrapped around the white skin, and if you find anything, push it back into the abdomen;
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of several strands and insert it into the back part of the skin, which is behind the groin area; After the waist, then cut the threads that appear to be strands until there are four strands; Then he assembles them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and binds the surface, which we have mentioned is beneath the skin of the genitals, with a strong thread from two sides; Then wrap the head with threads and bind it firmly from two sides so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter inside, preventing an abscess from forming; and place the thread again according to the first binding for two digits long, and after these two bindings leave the surface that is beneath the skin of the genitals exposed for one digit; and then bind everything else according to the roundness that the egg carries;
Then cut in the part which is away from the skin of the scrotum, until the blood flows, and the bowel, as we have said before;
Then apply moistened wool in oil to the wounds, and bind it as we have said. And sometimes the pale surface we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, due to fear of blood loss. For this happens often, and leave the bandage on until it falls off by itself;
and if it delays in falling off, soak it in hot water and place what we have said on it until it falls off;
then treat the wound with another method until it is completely healed.
of flesh hernia
In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like the vine tendrils that wrap around the branch, in such a way that you tie the vessels, above the waist lightly at the back;
Then cut it open, and treat the abscess of the one who works, until the pus flows;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the groin, as we have said, and the place becomes apparent;
and no internal organs descend to the thighs, and if they do descend, it is serious, and must be repaired at all times;
and if it remains in this condition for too long, the wound or tissue will become inflamed, until the intestines descend;
and this happens due to the stretching of the tissue in the groin area, as we have said, because it is stretched, then becomes softened and swollen and visible;
And the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before;
And sometimes it is treated with an iron in this manner: And the patient lies supine on their back between your hands, then cover the swollen area of the fracture with a pad about three fingers wide;
And then remove the padding that is under the skin as follows, then take the thread and place it on the visible area of the pad;
And press it firmly to the abdomen, then stitch the two visible areas of the pad at the head of the thread, and sew one and the other;
Then extract the head of the shaft, and do not cut into the surface or extend the egg or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the root of the intestines; Then treat it according to the treatment of wounds.
Then treat it according to the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, heal and treat the wound until it is healed.
The suture is tight, and there is no appearance of it in the rupture, and the cauterizations are soft in this place, and closer to healing.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men, because the tissues inside are softened, and it appears milky.
and when one wishes to treat it, have the patient lie on his back, and cut the soft skin over the natural skin;
then sew the two lips together with one seam, and if you wish, stitch the excess soft skin to three or four places firmly;
Then cut between the seams, and treat it as other wounds, until it is healed, and sew it up.
of the punishment
Know that castration is condemned in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book;
and it is not necessary except for two reasons:
one of which is that the priest knows how to answer when asked, and knows the treatment;
and the other, because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
I say then that castration is performed in two ways: By attraction, or by incision.
In the one we do by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until the joint is softened and hanging. then take them in your hand until they are reset and you no longer feel any discomfort.
On castrating the flanks: you should hold the animal still, and press the skin around the flanks with your left hand, then tie the suspensory bandage, and cut each side separately when you have properly skinned them;
and leave some of the fatty tissue and the thin layer of fat that is on the vessels;
And this method of castration is more severe than that which is done by traction, because with traction some part of the testicles might remain, causing the animal to desire lust;
then treat the wound until it is healed.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism exists in two forms among men: one in which between the two testicles there is an opening as the figure of a woman's body, where there may be hair, and sometimes it encircles the urine.
And the other manner is for women, and place on the finger as thick as a rod and two eggs.
And the treatment for both man and woman is that you cut away all adjacent tissues, and treat them as other wounds;
In the second manner, for those whose urine sprays on the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
Tentigene is a condition fitted onto the natural part, so that it appears too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the condition.
It is necessary to paint the excess of the tentigene on your hand or fingernails, and then cover it lightly;
and do not go too deep, so that no blood comes out, then treat the condition with another treatment until it is healed;
and for another condition that appears at the entrance of the mouth and spreads, and occasionally becomes worse, it resembles a cow's tongue, and therefore the ancients called it "cow sickness. It is necessary that you treat it as we have said about tendinitis, and care for it until it is healed.
Erratic is it when the nature of a woman is not perceived, or the passage is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that has come there;
and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that has come there; or it is due to added flesh, or from a thick or thin membrane, and it is formed perfectly in the abdomen, or on the sides, or within, or wherever;
and prevents conception and childbirth, and perhaps the onset of menstruation;
and the knowledge of these things is by examining the opening.
If constipation is closely apparent, then use either of my two methods or the right one.
If it is from a thin membrane and it is close to the two leaves, then hurry, and treat thus:
Place your two hands together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread.
then press the two thighs firmly together until the finer parts are flat, and place them over the abdomen;
then take linen, and soak it in oil, and place it on the area, and have the woman lie on her back each day so that it does not dry.
And if the sore is hard and thick, then you should cut it with a scalpel resembling a myrtle leaf.
If the swelling is from flesh growth, suspend it to the onceine and the hip;
and have the blood-stanching medicines ready, such as hawthorn, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with an abundance of egg;
Then apply a piece of leather wide enough so that the wound cannot close.
and let it be for a long time, and then dress the wound with a dry linen bandage;
and continue treating it until it is healed.
And when flesh becomes corrupted in a wound, it must be cut according to this manner, except for deeply seated abscesses. For in the deeply seated abscess that is in the wound, one should not attempt to cut it open.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that occur without proper treatment, and when hemorrhoids become old they harden.
and we have already mentioned in the section the appearances of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that respond to treatment.
I say that when hemorrhoids and hard growths are thoroughly embedded in the wound and do not respond to sensation, they cannot be cured by cautery.
Those who have a sore on their mouth, which can be felt, are those who can be treated by cleaning.
Therefore, you must place the woman in a cold room, then extract the hemorrhoid with forceps, and cut it off at its roots, then apply powder made from substances that constrict blood flow, such as oak bark and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
Then place his feet against the wall for an hour, then put them in cold water;
and if bleeding occurs, have him sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster for his back.
And if it stops flowing, that is good. If not, apply cupping to the back and breasts without injuring them;
Then take wool, and moisten it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply to the affected area.
And when the abscess has subsided, treat the area with ointment until it is healed;
And the one called "albathir" is red, and it resembles a rough head, so it must be cut as I have said about the thul. Then treat it until it is healed.
Many types of abscesses occur in the flesh, such as cankers and stone abscesses and herpes and ulcers and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, I must speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes in the buttocks, which is not one of those that occur in the bowel.
And if you wish to know the treatment with iron, observe whether the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red when you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it come to a head until the pain is alleviated;
Then make the patient sit on one chair, and have two small chairs where he can lean, and support his back and bring his legs together away from the injured leg;
And let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and bind them tightly with a good cloth;
Then give him the tool toward the right side, and bring the instrument used to work the mouth of the dislocation, which will be described in detail afterward;
And it is necessary that when you bring this instrument to him, you insert the tip first to determine the depth of the dislocation so that what enters does not go too deep and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not cause pain;
and he should place the tip of the instrument above, and hold the instrument firmly.
And when the abscess is ready to be opened, and it is cut by hand gently, then it should be cut at the top, in the spongy area.
and when the abscess is emptied, you should place moistened lint in rose oil, or in green oil.
and place the lint inside the wound at its base, and cover it with clean, moistened wool soaked in water or decoction of mallows outside the wound.
Then treat after two days of applying ointment as needed, until it is healed.
and sometimes lift the woman and cleanse the wound with a mixture of water and honey, and then use water or a decoction of lily roots and agrimony. Then return to applying ointment.
And if the wound is covered with a poultice, then you should avoid treating it with iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
Of childbirth It is necessary first for the midwife to know the signs of natural childbirth, and these are evident when you see the woman strain downwards, and desire to smell the air:
then the child hastens to come out. then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural form, and the passage is under his head, and the afterbirth follows with it;
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his belly so that the child comes out quickly;
for when it descends upon its head, the placenta comes with it, and the woman is cleansed of her excesses through proper purification;
and those who come in another way do not come naturally.
For sometimes it comes upon its feet, and emerges from the thighs or hands, or appears on its belly or backside, and turns by chance onto its neck, or in other bad positions;
it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and to guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the positions how one should assist her.
If the child comes out head first by natural means, and the woman gives birth heavily, and the strength of the mother is weak, then let her sit on a chair, or where women hold her;
and prepare her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then place a basin between her two thighs, as described in the form of a small spatula: and split the membrane, and cut until the moisture inside comes out;
and press the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give her an enema of fenugreek muscilago with sesame oil;
Then make her sniffle and sneeze with conditi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: Now remove the foreign object.
And if both hands dislocate, you must reset them gently bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up; then raise the chair off the ground, and support the woman so she does not fall when standing;
and if the hand cannot enter and the foreign object is dead, cut the hand with the knife that is placed here beforehand, and remove the object, then reset it gently.
of delivering the child onto her feet When the child stands on its feet, one must elevate it upwards; and then turn it little by little until it is even;
then take one foot and stretch it little by little.
When it jumps up to the thighs, instruct them to grasp it, and make it sneeze from condition; and may it jump free if God wills it.
And if it does not go as we have said, turn it little by little until it is in its natural position. For then it moves easily.
And if it does not come free as we have instructed, take mastic from the tree, sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and place the woman's nature within and remove her from this ointment, then have her sit in warm water up to below the ribs;
and when she is moistened below, apply the myrrh collar to her and place it underneath, then let her stay for one hour; then have her sit on the chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her abdomen, for the child is now jumping.
of the issue of the child upon its knees When the child comes in this form, let the bailie place his hands little by little; then let her be lifted by her neck, and hang her feet down, and lie her on the bed; and bend his hands little by little, and then take his hands on the belly, and remove the cushions below, until she is prepared to go down; and if the child does not jump, take his feet and move them forward, then push up his belly, then put your hands underneath; and bring the child little by little; and instruct the woman to hold on as long as the child descends.
of the issue of the child that comes with one hand hanging out It is necessary for the surgeon to return the hand: if it cannot be returned, help the woman stand and walk;
If she cannot walk, make her lie on the bed, and straighten her legs fully;
then manipulate the muscle as I have described;
and if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then study how to return the hand; and hold the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to pull as soon as the baby starts coming out.
from the birth of the child on its neck, and have her spread out her hands, and her face turned towards her mother's back It is necessary that the bailiff hold his hand, then turn it little by little, and hold it gently;
and when it is even, apply the natural manipulation with salt and oil as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little;
and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and instruct her to grasp it; and make her sneeze. In the same manner for the entire second part
In the same manner for the entire second part When it comes to the second swelling in this manner, cut the swelling to your nail, until the moisture is emptied.
and if the swelling appears on their face and neck, cut it from the mouth so that it is not obstructed, and relieve the swelling;
then insert the child as needed, and instruct the woman to grasp something several times:
about the birth of twins Know that jaundice often occurs, and sometimes three or four times; and this is not a strange thing, it often happens. These are strange things, and they do not live unless rarely.
These are strange things, and they do not live unless rarely. I know that they multiply and are separated by the surface which divides them, which is attached to the bud;
and sometimes they emerge as naturally as any others, as we have said.
And if they emerge forcefully, treat them as we have said, and let the surgeon be skilled, and do quickly and gently what he does. and do as he is moved for healing. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the month I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or up to XV, and are entirely shaped like a child according to the measure of the wise sage, and it is necessary that the bailiff oversees all this, for perhaps similar things may happen. do as is appropriate.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman of a dead child in her womb, as I said in the division, and there is no natural expulsion, and you are constrained to work with your hands; you must know if the woman is in good health and has no condition that causes fear of death;
It is necessary that the woman lie on her back, and let her knees incline downward, and raise her legs;
and the attendant should hold her in two parts, so that she is positioned on the bed such that she is not inclined towards the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth with a paste of moist oil mixed with muscillega of horehound and fenugreek and flax seeds, then anoint her hands with these oils and these pastes;
then gently press them into the paste lightly, then check one side where she presses to ensure they are suitable for her, and watch if the child is prepared to descend head first;
Insert the hooks in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or at the back of his throat or behind his beard or in his armpit or near his ribs, and if the descent is on the legs, insert them in his toes and on the middle sides of his ribs;
and he must hold the hook in his right hand, place the curve between his two fingers of his left hand, and press it gently with his whole hand, and insert the hook into any of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space;
then insert the other hook opposite it, or a third one if needed, so that the extraction is even;
and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other, to allow movement out, and let the bandages be toothed to hold the movements, as shown in this figure:
And if one part remains, anoint the side with some of his oils, and place it in that part, and pull the other part;
and if any remains, place this bandage higher up, and do so until it all comes out.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and he cannot pull back for grasping, then you must wrap it up with a cloth until it all comes out; Then place it at the joint of the sole or heel, and thus you must do the same with the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is narrow at the birth canal, or there is an accumulation of fluid in the head, then you must insert a spatula between your two hands, cut the head, and extract the fluid; where you should round it with the instrument called "almidach," of which the shape comes with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one;
and do the same if the child has a large head naturally;
and then draw the bones with pliers, and if the head jumps forward and is tight against the forehead, cut through until the moisture that is in the foot passage is released;
and if she cannot come out, cut her piece by piece until you can.
and if he is swollen in the belly or between the ribs, you must pierce him until the moisture flows out.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the adjustment to the mouth of the socket is light.
And if he is tight in the belly or breast, you must dilate him with the finger wrapped in cloth; and cut into the belly or breast until the moisture that is inside flows out;
and if the other limbs are removed and the head remains, push your hand in through a hole perfectly in the flesh, and pull it out to the mouth of the wound; Then insert the needle at point one or two, and pull it through forcefully;
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come upon it, one should not work on it, but rather administer moist and fatty substances; and the physician applies plasters, and slices in aqueous softening and moistening substances.
And if the child is on its side, and you can make it level, then treat it as we have said for a living child;
and if one has no power to do so, then pull it through in pieces, and leave nothing of the second skin.
And when you have done this, apply the treatment we mentioned for large abscesses that occur in the flesh;
and if bleeding occurs, apply cold compresses, and use other treatments as necessary.
And I saw a woman in whom the fetus in her womb had died, then another was conceived afterwards, and that one too was stillborn. After a long time, she developed an abscess in her breast, which swelled so much that it burst, and began to fester severely.
I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I applied an adhesive plaster, and out came a bone, and after several days another one. I was very amazed, because there are no bones in the abdomen.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
I treated the wound, and manipulated the bones until the woman was in better condition; and treated the woman for a long time in this way, and she would then excrete a little pus from the area;
and I have recorded this chapter for the reason that when masters encounter something unusual, they know to seek help.
Here follows the form of the cautery, as described in the books;
And to the two sides of the two shoulders. Nevertheless, the horns should be finer than the retort, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the tube should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees one finger, and its length half a palm; and between the two shoulders there should be two fittings of the same tube, which are firmly attached to each one, half a palm long or a bit more;
and these two fittings are positioned at the mouth of the apparatus to open when the two horns are turned.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the likeness of the tongs; and have two supports for the two heads, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers wide;
and when you wish to open the birth canal with the instrument, have the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging down and her legs spread, then insert the two supports together into the birth canal, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; then work your hand on the instrument just as you did with the tongs equally, according to how much you wish to open the birth canal, until the woman's face shows what she wants.
These instruments are all mounted, and their kinds are multiplied; and when the physician has them prepared, the work is done more quickly, and they are more valuable to people in proportion to their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument because you have not prepared it, for their needs are not excusable.
When the second child is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with condiments, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; and if it helps because of this, so be it.
If not, take some honey and make a hole in the cover, then put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cistus, and centaury; All these herbs, or some of them, should be boiled in water over the fire;
then place one end of a tube in the opening of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mare, and hold it so that the vapor comes inside the mare;
then make her sneeze, as we have said. The second joint jumps quickly.
And if she remains after this treatment and does not improve, instruct the bailiff to moisten his left hand in oil of sesame or in mallow decoction, and then place it on her body, and seek the second remedy; and when he has found it, take and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the mare does not fall during extraction;
but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; it will come and disengage.
And if the mouth of the nostril is narrow and constricted, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing, and of fumigating with herbs;
and if it does not respond to all of what we have said, then be careful not to pull too forcefully;
but it is necessary to tie the affected part of the nostril to the woman's thigh, then administer an enema of tetrapharmacum ointment; it will relieve and reset, and it will come back to its place;
however, when it reaches such a point that it causes bad odors in the stomach and head, and troubles the patient. Then appropriate fumigations should be used for them:
some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used to fumigate the woman for retaining her flowers and secondine is as follows:
And it is similar to glass in appearance, and one places the head subtly in the nature, and the cheeks wide over the fire;
and let the fumigation be over the coals, and continue it until it is spent, and then start another.
Many children are born who do not have a discernible anus, instead it is sealed by a fine membrane: Therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to incise that suture at its proper place, and not with a sharp spatula, and guard against touching it.
Then place damp wool in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until he is healed.
And if you doubt that he will keep it still, place a chain through the ring, and leave his hands bound for a day, and remove it when the child wishes to go to chambers.
And sometimes this obstruction comes from the sudden closure of a wound or abscess; it is necessary to cut that closure: if it should be treated, as we have said about the tendon of the thumb.
Fistulas that come from inside the anus are nodular, and those that come near the anus or in the space between the two parts often have one fistula or multiple.
And when that knotting is old, it must be treated, and hot moist poultices or fine powders are applied, and sometimes these fistulas persist.
And they are recognized by the fact that there is vomiting or flatulence when the patient vomits, and sometimes worms come out.
And there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and to half of the penis; and extend to the joint of the thigh, and to the root of the kidney.
And thus one knows the fistula penetrating to the fundament, and not penetrating: And it is that you place your thumb at the base, and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
And if there is curvature, insert a fine thread of linen or horsehair until you feel the thread or hair with your thumb;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or swelling or sign of life, as we have said: you know that it does not penetrate; so hurry to treat it.
And when the fistula reaches to the bladder or to the conduit of urine, then urination occurs, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it penetrates up to the knee joint, then the thread comes out at that location; if there is no twisting and the cause of the pain is around it, then it will quickly become a bone deformity, and neither medicine nor speedy remedy by ointment will help;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure other than work, and the vanity of foolish doctors who intervene in them.
In the case that is not persistent and is not old, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is so that the patient lies on your lap on their back;
and lift the legs up to the thighs, and keep the thighs inclined toward the abdomen; then insert a tent of linen, or of lead if there is twisting, until you know where the tent reaches.
If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you must place your index finger there; if you then feel that the testicle has been pierced;
and if you feel the hole or flesh where your finger is, then you know it is pierced; do not attempt to treat it if it cannot be healed.
It is said that some can be treated well, but this happens rarely;
and the treatment involves heating the cautery slightly according to the width of the fistula, as was mentioned before; and inserting it fully heated into the fistula until it reaches near the fundament; and do this two or three times until you know that the burnt flesh is charred, which looks like a feather of a bird;
and then treat it with cloths moistened with butter until the flesh grows back, then treat it with an ointment that promotes flesh growth and healing.
If he is thus healthy, it is well.
If this cannot be healed in any other way;
and if the abscess enters but does not penetrate to the root which is at the base, and there is a thick layer of flesh or fat between your bone and the abscess, and you see the fistula under this layer of flesh; cut it from the beginning of the fistula and then proceed forward to the abscess, and afterwards apply the cautery until you reach the head of the abscess; and the swelling will subside, and it will fall;
then clean the damaged tissues that look like a bird's feather, and leave nothing behind.
And if the blood fails you, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or with astringent medication.
For the fire cautery combines two good things: that is to say, the cutting away of adhered tissues, and stopping the blood and drying the moisture;
then treat moist swellings with butter or crushed substances, until the area weeps clear fluid, and remove the burned tissue from the wound.
then treat the wound with hardening ointments that adhere to the flesh, and the medications will dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes up from the depths of the fundament, and is distant from the body, then pierce it at the fundament, and examine it.
If you feel the tent, and it is between II (the membrane or flesh), where it is near piercing, there should be no other way but one of faith and hope, by means of one of the three methods:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it down to the base, or if possible place tents and treat it as described first;
and do not go too deep, so as not to cut the tissue that holds the foundation, and induce vomiting as desired; then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; by chance it may heal, or remove that covering and clean it after it is cut near the base, either by tenting or with another appropriate instrument; Then cleanse the wounded flesh in the wound as much as you can. Then study to restore the wound and to prevent a fistula outside the fundament:
Then study to restore the wound and to prevent a fistula outside the fundament: it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas occur in this manner: and it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is near the fundament on the skin above, then take a probe with a point in this form: And insert the thread twisted into two parts, and insert the probe along the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
If it is perforated at the margin of the fundament inside, then extract the thread from that perforation, so you insert your finger into the fundament;
and pull the head of the thread, and join the two shoulders together, and hold them to each other, and leave it for one day or two;
and restrain it several times until the thread cuts through the tissues between them, and they come together;
then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
If the fistula does not open, pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep. For it is not appropriate to make an incision too deep for the displacement and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spinous process where one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side it is not, so that one does not cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
Emorrhoids occur in two manners: where they are inside the fundament, like seeds of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in the skin there is blood, and there may be one or more, and they are away from the fundament and at the head of the fundament;
but those that are away have little moisture, and often there is a small amount of yellowish water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the flesh;
and the treatment for those who have them inside the fundament is to instruct the patient to abstain from going out until the fundament feels better, and the children are aware; hurry and grasp it with forceps, holding it with your nail, then cut it at its root;
and if the hooks cannot hold because of moisture, they take them with a sponge, or cloth, or a piece of cotton; and extract them with your hands, then cut them, and put on some hot powders that are used for cautery; or you cauterize them as is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the excrement cannot come out, give the patient a harsh and bitter enema to cleanse what is in the rectum so that it can pass freely; when the patient is constipated, and if the stool is hard in the rectum, then the treatment is easy;
when the patient is constipated, and if the stool is hard in the rectum, then the treatment is easy; And take them by your fingernail or with pincers, cut them off, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and that he fears the incision by iron. It is necessary that you manage the suturing according to this method:
It is necessary that you manage the suturing according to this method: Take the thread and tie it to a needle, then pull the thread from above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be loose;
and tightly pull the thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do this for all of them, and leave one to allow the excess blood to flow;
Then place a damp strip of rose oil or cerate on the foundation, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave them until they fall off, and when they have fallen off, treat them with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
from the dryness of the bowels or foundation Often there is dryness of feces in the intestines, and by compulsion of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not avail. It is necessary that you cut with the tip of a spatula or your nail through the skin above it, without leaving it to become moist. then treat it until it is healed as necessary;
and if it does not heal, then resume the shaving more vigorously than before until it heals well, even if it becomes chafed; Then treat until he is healed.
with trembling The flea is a small striped appearance on the body, and moves very quickly through it;
and sometimes it is found in cold places, and one feels it like being chilled to the bone, and it spreads throughout the body, more so in the hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose feather or a strong eagle feather, and place the quill on the chill, until the circles around the chill completely enclose it; then move your hand along the entire quill until you cover all around the chill, and place it quickly, and remove the chill from its roots.
And if you wish, do this with a thread of linen or iron according to this form, and let it be fine underneath and drawn over: Do not pierce, to keep the hair on the head, and press the hair.
And if you wish, cauterize the tremor as it is before in the chapter on cauterization.
Sometimes a enema of silver or sorrel, or of melted silk or bran is made;
and sometimes one uses small and large instruments, according to those to whom they are applied. Those who are treated in the care of children and those who are weak and in pain are small.
Those who are treated in the care of children and those who are weak and in pain are small. The form of the enema, small and large, is as follows, or the belly is bandaged in this manner:
and there should be a separation where the abdomen is bound as you see, and the intestines inside are perforated;
and there should be two holes on one side, and one on the other;
And let the pouch where medicines are placed be made from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes, and have one digit of space between each hole, then insert into these holes strong rawhide threads twisted ten times around, and assemble the pouch as if it were a drum. And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then administer as an enema;
and this is the shape of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the tip of the enema with oil or beaten egg white, or something similar, then insert it gently; Then the minister presses the patient with both hands, until he is completely covered, then removes the enema, and lifts the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it flow as much as possible; and if he sleeps one full night, then there is greater help.
And if you give him an enema in a disease of diarrhea, and the medicine comes out too quickly, then repeat it until he is well.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament, or an abscess, then the enema should be as fine as for a child;
and this is the form of the fine enema in which the skin is stretched:
We have already mentioned in the section the treatment of wounds;
Then we shall tell you about the remedies of hands and medicine, according to their completion.
I say that wounds vary according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are due to the impact of stones, and the cutting of swords and knives, or spears or staffs or arrows, or similar objects;
or they are made according to the places on the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the foot, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar parts;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory of them will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, be careful whether it is from the impact of a stone or similar objects, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you fear the formation of a hot abscess: If you treat it immediately to staunch the bleeding from the head if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the dressing be on the opposite side of the injured part;
and avoid having the patient become bloated from wine and heavy meats.
And if he does not wish to stop the bleeding, then let his meat diet be reduced, and he should not drink wine nor eat meat.
and place on the wound, if small abscesses occur, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in astringent wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, then apply to the fresh wound, which has not been exposed to air, the powder that I will mention a little later;
And if the area is inflamed, apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by suturing, then join them by stitching, as I will explain for belly wounds, of the suture.
If the wound is exposed bone and is loose, holding only slightly to a small point, cut it away; then treat the wound with medication, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat heavy foods, such as brains and boiled wheat, as well as porridge, and similar things.
And if you find the skin is rotten and does not adhere to the bone, cut away all the decayed tissue, then apply heat, and afterwards treat the wound.
and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be stopped with medication, seek out the vessel, and if you find it dislodged, tie it off with a thread; And if that does no good, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: and it is that you put in this powder which adheres as the fire has moved it.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take one part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; living chalk three parts, and finely powder it, and apply it to the wound, and press it firmly until it adheres well and joins with all its blood;
and then mix the mixture well, and leave it undisturbed if it does not swell; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with charcoal alone, when there is no incense or dragon's blood available, but the burn has peeled off the wound.
And if the burn has caused the wound to fester, especially in winter, one should not apply this powder.
but apply some digestible ointments, or a poultice made of oatmeal with water and honey, until it releases pus. then continue to treat it until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;
And I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference from that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, then there is no other treatment but to leave it untreated and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerve and causes it to withdraw; and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the tissue of the nerve is cold, and its continuity extends up to the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
but let the medicine be applied warm, such as chalk boiled in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and copper leaves also boiled in sweet water, and other minerals according to this method, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then sew and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is clogged and full of blood, then pierce at a lower place;
and if an artery is cut and bleeding occurs, then stop the flow, tie it off, and cauterize if necessary;
and if the windpipe is cut or the throat injured, and the passage through which the food goes is guarded, then sew up the wound on the side of the neck, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then bind it tightly, and leave it for several days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed;
And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then probe it; And if there are fragments of bone, remove them as forcefully as you can, and leave those that you cannot reach until the wound heals and the discharge is cleared;
And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and there is an abscess, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then check if the wound emits gas when the patient changes position: then you should know that the wound is fatal;
and if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, then do not apply the powder at first, nor bind it for the blood that does not stop flowing deeply, as it may return to the heart and kill the patient; but apply an adhesive salve, and change it twice a day;
and if you do not have a salve, place old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and allow the patient to rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more. then no spasm will come, nor will there be any heart palpitations or foreign body sensations. and when you see good signs, then you will know that the wound is safe. Treat her with tents and other treatments until she is healthy;
and if she cannot heal and the condition persists, then you will know that there is a fistula;
if the treatment as one ought to do. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or worse on the back, then treat that of which one is in front; if it is large, stitch it;
and if it is small, treat with powder, and if it is pressed against the bone, and in pieces that have been severed, then seek to heal the wound, and the torn tendons if they are separated; and if they are not separated, then let the wound heal on its own, which will ease the extraction;
and for other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
from the rupture of the abdomen
The rupture of the abdomen is large, medium, and small;
in the large wound, sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, protrude, causing infection;
and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because when the intestines are pushed back in too soon, they do not stay properly;
because the intestines swell immediately when they feel the cold, so they are pushed back in more forcefully, and because of this, a smaller wound is better, since the intestine can be more easily returned to its place than with others.
And know that a rupture of the abdomen occurs according to IV manners:
the II sides common in the side of the abdomen have, and the sutures of other wounds of the body and II other specific sutures are common to other wounds;
and nevertheless they are more proper with the side of the abdomen, and I will say each one and explain them.
I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine comes out, and it is a difficult thing to replace, this is done by one of the two methods: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a manner: soak a sponge or fine cloth in warm water only, or boil it in scalding water with citrus and spices, and rinse the intestine until the swelling subsides;
and sometimes use wine that is constricting, and it is mashed to help reduce the swelling.
And when you see the swelling subside, then moisten the intestine with water in which hawthorn and mallows have been cooked, for this gradually opens up the passage;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
And the first treatment is cautious regarding the spine, for one should not cut it without great necessity.
And this is the instrument for cutting:
Cut inward along the curve and not outward, and see here the form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, place them back in their natural form in their proper place, if you have the power to do so, for that is better.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on his back, with his legs higher than his head; And if it is in the part below the abdomen, place the head and feet higher than the affected parts, and similarly, if a rupture of the abdomen is in one of the two parts, raise the injured part higher than the other;
And thus it is necessary to treat those things as I say regarding large and medium wounds.
In small wounds, apply what is appropriate for you, then hold the compassionate minister in your hands who covers all the wound with his hand, and bring together the lips.
and this is the common method of suturing, and it is that you take one needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound some space, and insert a needle where there is strong thread. and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the suture, which is inside the skin, until you make it penetrate from that part, and bring together the two ends of the suture all together;
Then take the thread doubled around the needle on both sides, then bring together the two edges of the wound, and leave one finger's space, and place another needle there.
Then tie the knot of the thread as you did for the first needle, and continue doing so according to how many needles you need, until the entire wound is sutured.
And the needles should be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, because fine needles cut through all the flesh, and too coarse ones cannot enter properly: Therefore, they should be medium-sized;
And it is not appropriate to insert the needles too far from the flesh and skin, as they may cut and damage the wound before suturing;
and then cover the points of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and place tents or cloths over the needle points to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use one or two needles.
The second method of suturing is common, and it involves joining the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the tissue together with one needle or thread that is strong.
and when you have pierced all four sides together, then pull the needle back to the part where you started, in the manner one sews cloth;
and place a space between each seam as thick as one thin thread;
This is the stitch that a man used to sew up a wound in someone's abdomen, who had been stabbed by a knife, and the wound was more than one hand breadth wide, and two hand breadths of intestines were protruding, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I returned the intestine to its place after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound was sealed up until fifteen days, and I treated it, and he was well.
And the physicians had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I would place fresh cotton on the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle, and bring it from the outer part to the inner part;
when it has pierced the flesh straight through, seize the head of the thread or suture where you inserted the needle, and have it pierce from the inner part to the outer part;
and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as tailors do with fur, and leave one end out while taking up the other, until the entire suture is completed.
The second method of suturing, which Galen described properly, is as follows: some people bring together the two parts naturally and join one end of the thread to the other in such a manner:
Insert a needle into the nearest part of the navel, and pierce that place only, and leave the two heads of the rib cage; then turn the needle, and pierce from the outer part to the inner part, through the two heads of the rib cage;
then pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inner part, through two other parts of the navel that are on the other side;
and this is the most effective method of suturing and the most common.
Galien says this, and some testify that one should sew the abdomen with two needles, each having thread.
And one must insert a needle on one side, and another on the other, in the manner of those who sew belts;
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the suturing is more difficult than for other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
And it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the arrow had drawn it, then reset the intestine and sew it.
Then apply powder that heals flesh, and if the arrow has drawn blood, then place any available ointment on it until the wound absorbs it; And bind the thread, and let the suture be sealed, and the wound; then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;
and if you do not have medicine, place on it as soon as it begins to discharge pus, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you do not need other medicines in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you fear that the wound might affect the principal limbs, then it is necessary to moisten soft wool in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the angles, and under the armpits;
If there is pain or corruption in the bowels, and this often happens, then administer an enema of boiled black wine; especially if the corruption reaches the intestine.
Pierce it inside, and note that when it is the large intestine, it heals more easily than the small.
The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is due to the smallness of the veins that are there, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the spleen jumps out of the wound, put it back as you would with the intestine, while it is still fresh.
And if it is old and has turned black or green, then you must ligate the area that is discolored so that no more blood flows through, as there are veins and arteries there.
Then cut off what is between the ligament, and suspend the two heads from below the wound up to where the splinters fall, so that the extraction may be easier when the shards drop, and the wound will heal.
Of the fracture of the eye socket
When the intestines are pierced and the wound is small, it can sometimes be repaired in some people, as I witnessed a man who was stabbed in the abdomen with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of his stomach, it became infected and turned into a fistula, from which his excretions and gases were expelled;
I applied treatment according to what I could do, and did not stop from carefully removing debris until he was healed, and the flesh closed.
And when I saw him solder it, I feared the patient would suffer pain in his abdomen; and he did not suffer any pain, but remained in better disposition, eating and drinking;
and some experienced practitioners say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in such a manner: take pieces of thread with large knots, then bring the edges of the wound together, and when the threads have opened the mouth, place them on both sides so that they hold the opening closed;
and then cut the knot, and it remains in place so that it cannot be loosened, then place another thread in the same manner as before, until the entire wound is secured; and sew the wound.
If the head is embedded in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, one can ligature the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from an animal's intestine, in such a manner:
take the end of this intestinal thread that is very clean, and then twist a fine linen thread around it, then put the thread on the needle, and sew the intestine, and tie it in the rupture;
and this method of stitching intestines is no stronger than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the major intestinal areas, there is no healing or health without subtlety.
of a fistula wherever it may be located Know that any wound or abscess, when it comes to a head, is generally called a "fistula," and especially when it is drained and becomes hollow.
And a fistula is according to truth an abnormal knot hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also threadlike as the feather of a bird;
and sometimes clear and hollow, and at other times thick; sometimes small, and at other times sufficient;
and I have spoken about this in the section on wounds, that every wound which is not healed and has no flesh grows only because of one of the nine causes: that is to say, due to the smallness of the blood in the body; or because of its nature; For because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, do not allow new flesh to grow; where there is too much swelling; where the wound is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality; where the treatment does not have good medicine; for because the corruption is like a pestilence; for because the property in that region is slow to digest, and delays healing, and swells by nature; where there are veins in the bone:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicine in the division.
Now I shall inform you of the treatment for a fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the brain, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and some affect the principal part of the limb and similar areas.
And all fistulas of this nature are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I mentioned, and you have confidence in the treatment, and you wish to know it, then take a tent of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, then press it;
and if the fistula is curved, then search with a delicate tent of lead, for lead can bend around the curvature;
and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot properly search it with tents, then irrigate through one of the openings, for moisture passes quickly from one opening to another, and clean it;
then press it carefully to your best ability so you can determine if there are bones or nerves involved, and inquire thoroughly from the patient about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and where they feel it;
And when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the pus and the corrupted flesh that are inside;
And then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep from the right place, you must cut deeply as much as possible, then put strips soaked in bitter medicine into it, and place them up to the top of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
And then apply healing ointments to heal the flesh until it is healed;
And if he is not well by then, cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it away.
If a vein or nerve does not trouble the principal members as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackening, remove it until all the corruption is gone, then treat with substances that promote flesh growth until he is well;
and if he is not well and the swelling returns as before, know that you have not gone far enough:
then expose and search until you reach the depth, remove all the corruption, then restore the area;
And if he is thus healthy, it is well. If not, you know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach. there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature;
and if there is any small corrupted bone that you can pull with pincers, then extract it with the appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, remove them all, do not leave even one.
and if the moisture hinders you and there is no mistake or fear, cut through both flesh and moisture, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in one hour, place on the wound something that promotes putrefaction, and leave it until the flesh around the bones is rotten, and then the bones will come out more easily.
And if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, cut away the corruption only until all the black matter is removed, then restore the wound;
And if there is a large part of the corrupted flesh, and it extends to the bone tissue; it is necessary to search and cut up to the corruption, and then treat it until it heals;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to something that came inside the body, until the matter reached his leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason for it to burst on its own to open;
but the physician, due to their folly, operated excessively on the abscess until much matter was discharged, and it became a fistula, and many openings appeared that all flowed with pus and bodily moisture;
and many physicians treated it for two years, and there was no skilled practitioner in the art of hands until I was called to see it, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed out through the openings in large amounts; and the young man's skin turned red, and he had a yellowish complexion.
I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that they came together from all parts of the leg.
I hurried then, and probed into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, which I found corrupted and perforated, and the corruption extended to the inner part of the bone;
I perceived that which appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and I thought there would be no other corruption, though that which I removed.
and I began to treat the wound with internal medicines for a long time, and it could not heal.
and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and perceived it, and then removed it, and worked to heal the place. but I could not do so until I cut around one palm's width of the bone, and then treated it entirely with medicine. and he was healed and the wound closed quickly, and there was no need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and due to my fear of death for him. For often there was an evacuation of blood, but he remained entirely healthy, and in the place of the bone grew a hard tissue, and he had good health and suffered no harm or contraindication whatsoever, neither going nor coming.
And if the bone is broken at any place in the body, it must be treated in this manner: Take a linen cloth and stretch it over the end of the exposed bone, and instruct someone to hold it up. and place another cloth made of wool, thicker than the first cloth, and secure it over the flesh that is around the bone, stretching it so that you draw the corrupted flesh inward, and expose the flesh where you wish to treat it, so that the treatment does not injure the flesh.
and place a piece of cloth or a tablet under the bone to help remove the corrupted flesh;
and treat until one can see and feel that the corruption is gone, treating it again if necessary.
And if the bone is corrupted, and it does not appear clearly, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then expose the flesh completely;
then place the cautery in the middle, and then spread the corruption from one side to the other, and let the cautery be along the length of the corruption as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and let the bone on the other side be exposed;
and if the corruption is between two joints, then there is no other remedy but to cut it out;
and if the corruption is in a finger of the hand or foot, it is very serious, but still you must inquire about that corruption, how it appears to you; and clean in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or the nerve oppose you;
and know that the incising instruments and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for that reason it is necessary to prepare each tool for its particular task;
and know that the task will show you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the tool you need according to what is required.
The head of the joint may become stuck either due to swelling inside or due to moving away.
and when you have treated that corruption with medicinal care, and it does not improve, then it is necessary to amputate the limb up to where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes from this by avoiding death, or from the greater evil of losing the limb;
and the signs are that the limb turns black as if it were burned by fire, and after turning black, the corruption spreads from limb to limb and affects the whole body;
hasten to amputate it, and if this is due to the bite of venomous beasts such as a sea scorpion or viper and similar ones, if the corruption is in the head of the hand, then amputate it, and do not give it space to reach the arm.
And if it comes to the hand, cover at the joint so that the corrosion does not reach the arm;
And if it comes to the arm, cover at the elbow;
and if it passes the elbow, it is fatal, and no remedy will avail beyond the amount of its potency;
and do this entirely when the corruption comes to the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cover it at the next joint;
and if it reaches the foot, cover the entire foot; and if it ascends to the leg, cover at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die.
and the manner of cutting or sawing the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one assistant at one end of the ties downward, and another assistant at the other end upward, and you separate the flesh which is between the two ties by a width of one spatrumile until the bone is exposed;
then cut or saw it, and place a piece of linen on each side so that the saw does not touch healthy flesh, and cause another injury and abscess to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs while you are working, cauterize the area quickly, or apply some astringent powders;
Then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to the man in his sleep:
a black corruption occurred that seemed burned by fire, and this corrosion began first on the sole of his foot, spreading to cover the entire foot;
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cover his foot, and was healed;
and after a long time, the corruption returned to the sole of his hand, and he came to me, and I applied counteracting substances after purifying his body, but could not stop the corrosion;
and he wishes that I cover his hand, and I do not wish to, as I have hope to repel the matter; and I was also afraid that if I cut his hand, he would die, for the strength of the man was weak;
and he completely despaired and returned to his home, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed;
and I do not have it contented except for the purpose of doing otherwise, if one has need of it.
Sometimes an abscess comes to the flesh, and remains so long that it causes a great accumulation of pus; and then they cut and pierce, and the bone jumps out, and the flesh remains, just like a vessel; and the skin that is above is as delicate as fine linen, and does not run down to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "sin" (seam), and it is not called "fistula";
but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula";
and the skin is such that you should cut around it entirely, and especially when it is delicate, like fine linen; and it does not matter for its corruption.
And if you trust that the skin will harden, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with an enema thus:
Look if the breast is swollen, and the pus that comes from it has a foul odor, then administer an Egyptian enema made thus: Take honey, oil, and white vitriol in equal parts, and cook them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes red and as thick as honey;
and then take as much as you need, and mix it with water and honey, and use it to administer an enema to the affected area, holding the opening tightly; and leave the medicine on for two hours, then extract it while bandaging;
do this several times until the breast is cleansed, and the pus is removed;
and sometimes you should administer an enema of ash water when this medicine is not present; take the ashes of grapevine wood, pour water over them, then strain it and use it for an enema until you know that the breast is thoroughly cleansed;
and if the patient cannot tolerate either the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then administer an enema of water and honey with a little bit of litharge ground up; When you make a clyster of honey and mixed wine, let the honey have the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine causes the flesh to soften;
and when you have done this, and you trust that the breast is well cleansed, then use a clyster to promote flesh growth there, which involves taking an emollient plaster made with rose oil and in wine;
when you administer enemas and ointments with certain medicines, about which I have spoken regarding the treatment of ointments;
and if the opening of the breast is small and the tube of the enema cannot enter, widen it with a tool slightly, and place a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is sufficiently widened;
And if the wound is too wide, then sew it up but leave enough space only for the poultice to enter, and if the hole from which blood flows out is above, cut it lower down.
And if you cannot cut the breast as you wish, then prepare it in such a way that the blood flows to the lowest point, for when bleeding is severe, do not allow flesh to grow back, and if you cannot cut the breast as you wish, then prepare it in this manner: so that the blood flows gently downward, and do not leave any of the blood behind;
so that the blood flows gently downward, and do not leave any of the blood behind; and take consolidating medicines to apply on the wound, and place a bandage of linen that covers the entire wound; then cut in the firm places an opening larger than the first, then apply ointment on another cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over the wound to lighten the burden, and do not remove the large bandage until after several days once;
and the one over the opening of the wound should be frequently removed to relieve the burden, and clean what flows from the wound, whether it is venomous or not enough or sufficient, or digestible, or undigested;
and be watchful if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine is applied in such a manner and you see nature rising over the wound opening, then clean it as the healing begins, and approach the treatment;
And then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons affect after a long time, do not despair of recovery, for health is near.
For there are people who suffer delayed healing of flesh in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if undigested food remains in the breast after many days, know that the breast does not recover;
and if the breast takes too long to heal and is delayed, add drying medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as a diaphoretic ointment, for it contains much vitriol, and this is the final medicine;
Take a definitive salve, and make it with rose oil, and rinse it with old wine equal in substance;
then apply it and use it;
and this same method works better when thickened, when a definitive salve is not present, take murrex dye and aloeswood and incense, grind them, and powder them over the honey while it is on the fire;
and then apply it to a cloth, and place it over the chest, and sometimes administer long leaves of arisarum and roots of heavenly lily, which are also like flour of fennel and centaury; and use simple or compound remedies: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have mentioned, and use it;
and if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep, and impresses upon the bone, or affects the hard parts of the body, or the ligaments; treat the wound as we have said before for a fistula.
Panarisis is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or occasionally occurs in other joints;
and when they are old and no attention is paid to them, the abscess becomes severe, and it spreads and discharges pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and possibly extends throughout;
And the corrosion reaches to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the shoulder joint is swollen, and the color is bad.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment is of no use, then you must cut away all the excess that remains from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is a great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail adheres to the flesh and begins to suppurate and become inflamed, then you must place a thread under the nail that is piercing the flesh, and lift it up, and cut away the affected flesh carefully and gently, and apply the remaining healthy flesh with burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it out, and treat with force, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
And if you see the toe corrupted, cut it at the first joint as has been previously said, then treat it until it is healed;
And if it is wounded and penetrated, and he feels great pain, then you must treat it first;
Then cut the nail of the spatula sharply across, and be careful not to cut into the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
And if it happens, place something on it to soothe.
The second bone that is born in the hands of some men is entirely flesh, and sometimes there are bones, and at times it has a nail, and some of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birthplace is in some people's case.
Those who are born with a deformity of the toe do not move it, and those who are born at the joint of the toe may perhaps move it;
The body of the person who is fleshy is so light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Those who are born with a condition at the root of the joint are difficult to treat: so hold the copper gently.
In the one who is born or should be at the rear end, you must first cut the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone in a single stroke suitable for him, then treat it until it is healed.
The swelling that comes to the two together comes by birth, or by inflammatory reaction of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
You must cut that solder so that the parts repair according to their natural forms; then place between two cloths or linens soaked in rose oil so that they do not solder; or place between two pieces of fine wax until the edges are soldered as is appropriate.
If swelling comes to either of the two with the palm, then cut that swelling as it should be done.
The veins are thick, wrapped up, full of melancholic excesses, which come to many parts of the body;
and it happens more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry burdens, than in others.
It is necessary then that you administer an enema at times, and then treat them with basilicon salve.
The treatment with iron is according to two methods: one involves cutting and drawing out the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein and draw all the blood out.
The treatment with cautery is according to this method: First, heat the leg with warm water very strongly until the thick blood becomes thin, then lift the patient's leg from above the thigh down to the part below the knee;
Then cut the vein in one place or two or three, of a wide size, then lift and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one side to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient's strength can endure;
and then tie it up, and instruct him to eat foods including black colicwood;
and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, which harms the patient.
The treatment of this condition is as follows: raise the patient's leg, if there is much hair, then place it in a bath, and wash the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swell the veins;
And if you do not have water, heat it by the fire, and then cut straight into the vein on the back of the knee, or in the part above the ankle;
then work the skin to the bone, and strip the vein from each side until it appears when you feel it;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord;
then insert the blade underneath until it is raised from the skin, and then gently cut towards the bone, then make another incision above three fingers;
then strip the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift with the knife as you did before, and cut towards another bone, as you did previously;
Then cut another length, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cut at the joint of the foot, then draw it and lift it up to the second joint;
then extract it joint by joint until it comes out completely, then cut it;
and if you cannot draw and lift it, pierce the thread with a strong double needle, pull and draw it, and insert below the cut, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; and be careful that it does not break, because if it breaks, one cannot draw or lift it, and this causes harm to the patient;
and when you have treated it entirely, place wool moistened in wine and rose oil over the wound site; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped around itself, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it promptly, but do not sever it; and treat it as we have said previously.
The shape of the instrument used to cut the vein is curved, and it does not cut cleanly, so as not to sever the vessel;
and it is of large curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vessel, but it should be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
This vein arises in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in ground where there is no moisture;
and by chance it may arise in other parts than the legs, and this happens due to the putrefaction that comes from under the skin, as it arises within the body like snakes and worms, arising between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes a very large inflammation in the leg, then the location changes, and the vein begins to come out, like the root of a plant.
When the wound is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of linen from one and a half to two fingers' width, tie it, and leave the bandage hanging down the leg, and each time there is any looseness, wrap it around the linen again and tie it.
and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root until it has come out completely; For if you cut it, it enters the flesh and causes an abscess and putrefaction in that place, and a bad illness;
For which reason it must be treated bit by bit until the end, and nothing should remain in the body;
and sometimes this vein when treated from five palms in length, or ten, and one hand twenty to me, from whom it extends ten palms in length, and when you cut it, it emits a jet or perforation, and pierces right through so that everything comes out;
and let the matter that is inside be emptied, and administer to the place medicines that expel putrefaction for some days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
And sometimes this vein is deeper, especially when it appears at the ankle joint or at the foot, and there is much bleeding from it;
Treat it as we have said before.
worms that are born between the skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "buffalo disease," because it often affects oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body moving up and down, and one can feel it well as it moves from limb to limb, until it breaks the skin where it goes, and there it bleeds.
and it is caused by putrid matter from some humors, such as worms and serpents and lumbrics and ascarids in the belly;
and be wary of its malicious effects, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, it may enter and destroy the eye; and this happens frequently.
When you see that it needs to be drained and treated, one cannot proceed except when it is moving:
then you must bind the area above and below with a strong, tight bandage, then cut into it and drain it forcefully. If the pus is deep in the flesh and you cannot find it, cauterize the area with fire until it stops bleeding.
and the greatest harm it causes is that it can corrupt the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the head close to the eye, then firmly grasp the eyebrow, then cut above it, and pull out.
and the patient should use cleansing of the body with soluble medicines for removing foul humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain limbs, and can move from one limb to another;
and I saw what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, who showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
And after a short time, the flesh rises like a worm on the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place and fixes itself in the shoulder, and then after a short time runs throughout the entire body until it reaches the other arm;
then he told me that it quickly went around the body, as I saw;
I marveled greatly at how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease behave in such a manner. Nevertheless, I had heard many say that pain could be moved from one place to another, but I had not seen it myself until now, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, which made this windiness apparent;
And they do not appear according to this reasoning to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins relaxed.
And when you wish to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then cover it above and below quickly, and then cut into it until that windiness forces its way out. and cauterize the area;
and if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it as one would for expelling windiness, such as with pungent pills, and serpent's head pills, and similar others.
Arrows vary according to their forms and the parts of the body where they penetrate.
The diversity among them is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and bristly ones, and smooth ones; and of those which have two corners, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are pieces;
and that which falls on any limb does so in two ways: or falls on a principal limb, such as the brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar parts. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you next, become apparent: then you must beware of extracting this arrow, for death follows in many cases; and when these bad signs do not appear, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then remove it and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when an arrow hits and pierces the bone, and jumps the meninges which are above the brain, is when scotoma and coma and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasm and disturbance of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes blood comes out of the nostrils or ears; and sometimes speech and voice are lost; and from the wound moisture white like milk comes out, and it also comes out like pus from flesh;
and if these signs appear, then proceed with treatment, and extract the arrow if it is inside.
The signs of an arrow when it strikes the heart are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were embedded in something hard, not empty; and sometimes the arrow moves like a pulse, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat occur, and syncope happens: you then know without doubt that death is imminent.
And the sign of the arrow that pierces the throat is that foamless phlegm spouts from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow strikes in the covering of the buttocks, it is near the small ribs; and causes great pain and groaning and sighing; and the movement affects all the shoulder limbs.
And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, by chance something of undigested meat may spout from the wound.
And if the arrow strikes in the belly, and no sign of it can be felt through the intestines, there is no hope for treatment, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes to flow, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other limb, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and joint and spine of the back and rib and thigh and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to many positions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for which reason you should do otherwise.
It happened to a man that an arrow fell in his skull at the root of his head: I tried it, and extracted it from the other side behind the ear fat, and he was healed without harm.
And I extracted an arrow from someones eye socket fat below the membrane, and the arrow was embedded, with only the tip toward the wood visible, and the arrow was large for a Turkish bow, made entirely of light iron without feathers;
The joint was healthy, and no bad accidents occurred.
And he extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with wings:
I grasped the barbs, and carefully extracted it so that the Christian was healthy.
And I extracted an arrow from the man who had it embedded in his stomach, and I thought he would die;
and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change; I cut around the arrow, and carefully maneuvered it, and forcefully extracted it, and he did not suffer any bad accident.
And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrowhead stuck in his back, and the wound is sealed over;
and the arrow remains inside him, and he does not change his natural disposition at all, nor finds any harm in his natural functions.
And if you wish to treat another man who has an arrow shot into his face, and the wound is sealed over; and remains in this state without suffering great pain;
and many other similar cases.
And he extracted an arrow from the king's prince, who had it embedded between his ears, and it was slightly inclined towards the right side; And the arrow was entirely buried.
I was called to treat her after she had been ill for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I examined her thoroughly and carefully, but found nothing. and she felt pain and discomfort behind her right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I applied a poultice to the area to prevent swelling. and the location of the arrow became apparent.
and the location of the arrow became apparent. I applied the poultice for several days, and then reopened the wound. The patient remained this way for a long time until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose;
and he says to him. I applied corrosive and sharp medicine to the wound for several days, until it was open, and I probed it, feeling the tip of the arrow that lodged in the spot;
then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the head of the arrow became visible;
and the inflammation around it lasted for about four months, and then I opened the wound so much that I could place pincers in it, but the arrowhead would not come out;
then I did not stop trying and inventing various instruments until one day I removed it with well-made pincers, according to what its form will be at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out and restored the wound.
And the physician judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I then reset it, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely well.
I have told you about the nature of extracting some arrows, so that you apply your treatment to what I do not mention, for books cannot encompass everything;
but wise masters compare well with great skill, and for what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in the descent of strange things that occur in this art.
I say that arrows exit from the members in which they are embedded in two ways: at the place where they enter, or from another part;
and that which jumps out where it entered is an arrowhead embedded in the flesh, and sometimes it may now jump out on its own.
And if it does not come out now, leave it until the surrounding flesh is ripe and the exit is clear;
and if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days, and soften it each day;
and then it will come out on its own; and if it does not, carefully enlarge the area around it with fine instruments until the surrounding tissue is loosened, and then extract it.
And if the arrow is hidden in the body so that it cannot be seen, search for it thoroughly with the tent. and if you feel it, draw it out with some suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, cut as deeply as the wound is wide;
and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it holds fast, remove the flesh that is embedded on two sides as far as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out;
and be careful not to break the arrow, which would make it harder to draw out.
And if you cannot do it all at once, leave it until the area around the wound is healed, then draw it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the bleeding opposes you, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of cutting the nerve and the vein, and place a probe as you can draw out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and place the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow hit him, for this is the greatest help that can be given, and if you cannot, then place him as the signs show you;
The arrow that comes from another part, where it shows some sign of it, or the skin is swollen in such a way that one sees or feels it clearly:
Cut up above, so that the forceps can grasp it, and then extract: try now with force.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand circularly until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then draw it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then try to extract again until it comes out;
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, cut off the entire shaft;
and if the shaft falls off, and you wish to administer cautery, apply the instrument carefully so that the tip of the arrow enters the blade of the instrument;
and then cut forcefully, and if the arrow is broken, apply the instrument with the tip entering in, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the wound is, if you can, and then treat the wound as necessary.
And if the arrow falls into the thigh or in the belly or at the bladder or in the buttocks, and it is near, and you can cut over it, then cut;
and be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound if necessary; and continue the treatment until it is healed.
The form of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways to do this: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the needle used to pierce hair is also like the feather of a bird, to pierce at the tip of the arrow, as shown here is the shape:
There are thirty-one veins from which one can bleed for treatment, sixteen of which are in the head, namely: The blows which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries that are visible in the two temples; and the two veins that are in the temples of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two jugular veins that are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lips, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins from which one usually bleeds are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side, and laypeople call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fascia", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and laypeople call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and laypeople call it "vein of the abdomen", and it runs over the fossa, and it is the one from which bleeding occurs, as it appears clearly on the wrist.
And the basilic vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is beside the curvature of the thigh of the left side, and the second is called sophene which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins beside those.
The vein behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines;
And the qualities of the surgeon, as I tell you, are that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck to a board, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: seek them then with your finger, and where you feel the pulse below your finger, incise there;
then take the lancet, and insert it below the vein up to the bone, then raise your hand along the entire length of the vein, and cut through both the skin and the vein well two fingers wide, and let out as much blood as you wish;
Then strain and bind it until it is healed;
and I have already mentioned the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The treatment of the two arteries that are in the two temples is effective for chronic headaches, and for persistent pain, and for long-standing eye conditions involving watery eyes;
and the qualities of the healer are as I say: and the patient should strain their neck until the two veins become clearly visible; and feel the pulse below your nose, and then bleed it;
Then lift the arm above the vein on your index finger, and insert the lancet below, raise the vein upwards, and cut it, just as you did with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
Then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put some cotton on it; and then bandage it firmly, and leave it until it is healed;
and we have already spoken about their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
The vein on the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic vein for treating ancient face diseases, and for migraines, and redness;
and the quality is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting, until the vein constricts; then take the instrument called "fosser," here is its form:
And place the point on the vein, and press above it with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the amount you wish; then release the patient's neck, and tie off the vein until it is secure, sometimes once or with a wide flame.
Nevertheless, it must not be that the flames are too sharp; and proceed cautiously, as the bone is close, and by chance the flame may break if it is fine.
The blood from the two veins that are in the two lacrimal bones helps with the eyes, and for blepharitis, and for redness in the eye, and for cataracts, and for diseases of the face;
and the quality of their blood is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting with some kind of bandage, as was described before;
then the treatment is done, and the bloodletting should be shallow, about as long as a flame, somewhat wide, because there is no flesh there. And if the flammable material is fine, it might break;
then let the blood flow, as much as you need, and then cover it with cloth, and bind it securely.
The vein of the nose is valuable for treating fever, and violent headache, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is chronic;
and the quality of the vein is such that the patient should pinch their neck, then pinch their nose with your left hand, and take a fine flame long, and place it between the two nostrils, for the vein does not appear well otherwise, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then bandage it for a night, because it heals very quickly;
The salve of the two binders helps in tightening the navel, and at the beginning of mixing, and in many diseases, and for impetigo, and corrosions, and herpes, and ulcerations;
and the properties of the salve are such that the patient tightens their neck on either side, as we have said;
and the master standing over the patient's head, and the patient sitting on a chair, then open the vein of the long side slightly, then draw blood moderately, as much as is necessary;
then do the same on the other vein, then loosen the tie, and moderately bind both veins so that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning, so the wound may heal.
of the salve of the leaves The bleeding of the veins above the lips helps in the coagulation in the mouth, and for the corruption of gums, and splits of the lips, and nose and around.
And the quality of treatment is to have the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are recognized by their blackness, and by the small black veins around them:
thus cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and are in doubt, then cut the larger one on each side, and similarly do so for the two veins above and below, because it is the same manner.
Remove the tongue from the socket The healing of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the healing of the cephalic vein, and this is at the narrowing of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the healer are such that the patient urinates into your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and you look below on each side for a black vein:
treat then the one and the other, but do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
The veins of the arm that are commonly treated are treated in two ways:
either by piercing the entire breadth with a sharp myrtle leaf, or with an olive branch like cutting knives, and it is called "anesil"; And they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame of fire is very famous, and it is as wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are full of visible thick blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
and it is finer in shape, and is for bleeding fine veins, where there is fine yellow blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids in diseases that affect the throat, and the neck, and the chest, and the abdomen;
and it is necessary for the physician to bleed cautiously, and to avoid the artery which is nearby. And if he cuts the artery, and blood flows out, then it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have said; and must not be piercing the flame, but cutting as before.
And if the basilica is not apparent, then you must extract it and change to another. where you want any vein of it, or heal in its place the vein on the arm: it appears clearly; and the cup to the flame as before, as we have said.
And if you want to know the place of the healing, then you must extract the arm and touch the place until you feel the pulse; Then mark the place of the bone, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein on the flame side. and be careful not to hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it coming out as high as a child's urine, and the blood is red and fine, know that this is arterial blood: hurry then, and press firmly for a while, then remove your hand if the bleeding stops, as this often happens; bind the arm, and leave it like that, and do not move it for the patient;
And let him be under fear, and do not move it until he is well.
And if the blood does not clot, and it is necessary for you, and no medication is present, then cut the artery if it appears, because the head will follow. and clot the blood.
And take the bark of fig tree, and cut it, and take one half and bind it securely until the other day;
if the blood clots, it is well; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that clot blood;
And the stiffness is not serious in many positions due to the small area of the wound, and the strength of the arm's ligament.
The artery in the middle helps to carry blood from the head above and from the body below, as it is composed of the basilic and cephalic arteries, as we have said;
And it is necessary for the surgeon to be cautious near the nerve that is below, and if he cuts too deeply, and finds the nerve, it will swell and cause great pain, and by chance may not heal;
And this nerve is often visible, but if it cannot be seen in some people due to its subtlety, then you must use an instrument to find it; And avoid the nerve as much as possible.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make the incision along its length.
The cephalic vein helps to draw blood from the head and aids the eyes;
And it is necessary to draw blood by puncturing with an olive leaf needle or a myrtle leaf needle, for this is the safest of all veins, as it has no nerve or artery nearby. Nevertheless, it is necessary to find the most gentle place, and do not worry if it must be done gently the first time, and one may repeat. And sometimes the area swells for some people when it is done for the first time, but it does not cause any harm.
The quality of the vein is as you think.
The first thing you must know about medicine is that it is not intended for any other purpose than to preserve health and to prevent future illnesses;
and the treatment should be administered through one of the three veins that are in the arm: that is to say, the cephalic, facial, and basilic veins; and one should treat at the beginning of spring and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear;
and one should treat either on the first day or on the third, after two hours or three from the start of the day.
The physician who treats diseases has no fixed hour determined, but when the need is for day or night, at all hours and in all times;
and it is not proper to treat children until they are fourteen years old, nor women carrying a fetus from the fourth month until the seventh. And one should not treat the elderly who have passed sixty years.
And when someone wishes to be treated, in whatever manner, it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines with a gentle enema, if they have much retained feces, so that the veins do not attract from the intestines harmful superfluities to the principal members;
nor should one treat someone who is too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, until they are sober, nor hydropics;
And if one becomes sick after colic pain, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent intercourse with women, and from labor, staying awake and fasting, and all the strength, whether by means of weapons or the body;
then subtly thin the humors if the blood is thick, through food and drink and medicine, if you have the knowledge to do so;
then enter the bath if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood, and bleed from the vein around the elbow, as we have said;
and on that day keep away from work, and sharp points, and lust, and similar things;
and be tied and joined, and let the surgeon be higher than he who is being treated, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the bandage moderately, for if it is too tight or loose, blood cannot flow properly;
and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt;
then moisten the surgeon's finger with a little old oil on the flame, then place his thumb of his left hand on that vein slightly where he wishes to incise, so the vein does not slip when pricked.
For there are veins that slip away from the surgeon like cords, and some are full of air, so when placed near the flame, they retract from the heat, and thus one cannot open the vein; And if he works on opening the vein, if the wound is too narrow, then it is necessary that the surgeon be cautious in these matters.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, then begin again a bit below that place or above hastily, if the area is not swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient is afraid, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm: by chance there may come soft abscesses;
do not enter the bath, then restart the surgery if it pleases him;
and if the opening is small, or the blood flows thinly and you doubt that it will not flow as much blood as you wish, then apply heat directly to that opening itself.
and work it a little more quickly so that the area becomes swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the area swollen, do not begin to draw blood again, and put a little poultice of oil on it, for it will alleviate the body of blood, and the poultice of oil is soothing in this place.
and thus administer the poultice of oil after each bloodletting when you open the veins to stop the flow of blood;
and he does the same with thistle and yoke of them when it is placed on the spot; so carefully cut and divide it when it is too large.
And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when there is no proper heat except at the time when the vein opening is small, then hurry and place on the spot a sponge moistened in warm water and vinegar for a little while, and press it for one hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood flows from the vein, and if any black or green discoloration remains at the spot after some days, it does no harm; And if you wish, apply something of aloes or myrrh dissolved in juice of calamint, mastix, or similar.
And many times an abscess and swelling occur at the joint of the heel:
Place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft upon pressing with your hand, then that swelling is harmful. Avoid applying any of the things we have mentioned, for fear of cutting into an artery;
but apply the dry plaster to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And draw out the blood from each according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it continue until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for one who is full and robust, and needs bloodletting, make the incision wider, and let the flaps be wide;
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed them in small amounts but frequently, and this should be done by cutting diagonally, not vertically;
and this method of bleeding prevents loss of blood and damage to nerves, and is better than long or wide incisions.
And for him who needs to strengthen his body, give moist bread in grape juice; If he is heated, let blood three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, give moist bread in syrup of muscat or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup before strengthening.
And if he faints after losing a lot of blood, it is necessary for him to drink broth of meat, and fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to bleed his arm and let blood again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by heavy bleeding, that he lets blood little by little, according to the amount of his continued strength.
And who wishes to bleed his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, should let blood seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And who wishes to let blood from another place should do so on the second day or the third.
For he has much blood within his body which is already heated, and it causes fever; so one must draw a large quantity of it, and enlarge the passage until it flows easily; after you have considered all the conditions for strengthening, and place your hand on his pulse when he is being treated, so that death does not come instead of recovery, which often happens when the healer is negligent;
And it is not right when you wish to dislocate the arm, and let blood the second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly upon it; nor if he is crooked, that he extend the arm quickly, for that would be harmful;
but leave it until it heals from the second time; where you apply the tip of the flame until the blood which has coagulated in the vein opening flows out, and place on it a poultice of linseed mixed with water, and press upon it lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not bind it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so from the same vein, or from another vein, or from the other arm.
The vein in the arm is bled instead of the head vein because it is composed appropriately.
And the method of healing is that the patient immerse his hand in hot water until the veins turn red;
Then bind moderately so that the vein is well compressed, now drain the blood from it, not from the wide part nor the long part;
and let the opening be wide, and drain well near the joint of the hand, and if blood does not come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run into the water until you have enough;
and if it is in winter, do not place the hand back in hot water, for one does it more in winter than in summer;
and the draining of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there is no artery or nerve in it.
The salvation of the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
stretch the hand, and immerse it in hot water until the veins swell, as can be seen; and if the vein crosses sideways, and you cut it completely, nothing will be harmed;
and do not go too deep, for the nerves are completely bare of flesh, and then immerse the hand back in hot water if the blood has congealed in the wound, and it cannot flow out.
And when you have drained the blood as much as is necessary, put on the vein oil and wax to seal it quickly, and do this for each vein.
The treatment of the left hand is for the disease of the spleen, and do it exactly as I told you for the right.
The salve of the sophene is effective against all diseases that are below the body, such as ailments of the thighs, retention of urine, disease of the legs and knees, and old diseases of the hips and legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of its treatment is that the patient immerses their foot partly in hot water, and rubs the veins until they dilate, and bandage above the ankle joint; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many veins;
treat then the largest vein, at the ankle, for it is worth more.
And if you treat it above the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and treat it by cutting through as in slicing;
and let the flame be extinguished.
And if the blood cannot come out, place the foot in warm water, and let the vein be opened properly.
And if the cautery fails the first time, then begin again slightly above it the second time, for the area is salty;
do not fear the nerves, as we have said, and thus do the same cauterization of the other foot equally.
The site of the sciatic vein is at the ankle on the inner side, and its incision relieves hip pain when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of his health is such that the patient enters the bath, and presses four fingers above the ankle, because otherwise the vein does not appear;
and if it appears, then heal it in all ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is better that you cut it, for the place is low, and it is very responsive to many people.
and it is better that you cut it, for the place is low, and it is very responsive to many people. And if you do not find it, then heal any vein that appears on the back of the foot and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves;
and let the blood flow as much as you wish, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and press it; She is now healed.
Suction cups are made of horns, or wool, or glass;
and cupping is performed according to two methods: either by hitting and drawing blood or without hitting.
And this cupping which is done without hitting is according to two methods: either it is done with fire or without fire;
and cupping which is done by hitting and drawing blood is performed on fourteen parts of the body, of which one is entirely on the head; and the other is in the neck; and two others on either side of the neck; and the ventouse below the chin; and the ventouse of the two shoulders; and the ventouse above the buttocks; and the ventouses in the two arms; and the ventouses of the two legs; and the ventouses of the two ankles;
and the ventouse does not draw blood, except from small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken a person as bleeding from a vein would; And it is not appropriate for it to be administered, neither by fire nor any kind of heat, in any illness that comes from overabundance, until the entire body is emptied.
And if due to the necessity of illness it is necessary to bleed, or by habit, let us do so each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and throughout all times;
for there are those who, when they need to be bled, have a heavy head;
and there are those who suffer from fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in the eyes;
and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and cough up blood; and there are some who dream, and see in their sleep blood and wounds and deaths and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially at the same time each month, we instruct them to bleed after three hours of the day.
The salve of the muzza helps with headache... that comes to the eyes, and it is not appropriate for this to occur after the evacuation of the entire body;
and this ventilation is in place of the salve of the cephalic, and it is not appropriate for those with a cold constitution to use it, or who have catarrh, because it causes them great harm;
and for these reasons it is not appropriate for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head;
And those who become frequently relieved by it, may become forgetful, and therefore the cupping should be placed a bit lower due to the risk of forgetfulness.
The ventosation behind the neck is in the place of the nape of the head and the basilica, and for that reason it is useful for constricting the hip joint, and for splitting the channel of the thigh bone, and for all purposes, and for swelling;
and here one must apply gentle pressure, because if it holds too tightly, it causes obstruction in the stomach and heart.
The ventosations at the two sides of the neck are useful for headaches, and for ophthalmic pain and migraine, and for choking, and for pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the nape of the basilica;
and you must instruct the healer to press his hand gently when applying it, so as not to cut the artery, and avoid bleeding.
The ventilation below the chin is beneficial for diseases of the mouth, and for the corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the salivary glands below the two lips.
The ventosation of the shoulders is effective for diseases that come from heat and swelling.
The ventilation of the ribs is as valuable as that of the three veins of the arm, for it attracts blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the area is bare of flesh, and it lies near nerves and arteries.
The ventilation above the buttocks is effective for hemorrhoids and diseases below it, and the ventilation should be large, made of brass, and must draw well; and by chance, if she were subtle, she would break; and there I make large wounds.
The suction cups on the legs draw blood strongly from the entire body and are beneficial for chronic pains in the thighs, and of the belly, and of the bladder, and alleviate fevers;
and they are at the location of the two ankles, and the two calves, and overall they weaken the body after prolonged use, and cause fainting in many conditions.
The method of applying the suction cup is to first place it empty, then suck gently, and attach it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area red and swollen, and notice the redness of the blood;
Then heat it, and apply suction cups, and be careful with the condition of the body, for there are those who have thin flesh, and clear pores: It is necessary to cut only once, and it is necessary to make wide cuts, and somewhat deep; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to cut twice: the first time to clear the path for thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to cut a third time;
and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, we only need to do it once. And if we lose a lot of blood, we often replenish it;
and if the blood is thick, then incise it deeply, and the ends should be such that the heart perceives it suddenly, and for those who have thick and hard skin, and whose pores are narrow, you should anoint the areas with ventose oil that is appetitive and dissolving: if it is necessary, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in winter, use sorrel oil, or lettuce oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.
And if the excess is thick and cold, then take marjoram oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar.
And if the one to whom treatment is given has tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied, but it is necessary to wash after ventosity with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar.
And those who have much moisture should rise from a bath of myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses should rise from old wine, or juice of succus, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar.
And it is not appropriate to use cupping before a bath or in a bath, but after the bath for one hour or two;
And do not let them sleep after cupping, but it is necessary for them to walk around when they should be cupped and when they have been cupped.
And be wary if the person who is being bled is choleric, and if the blood is too thick and inflamed; Then it is necessary for them to take cold things, such as sour apples, endive, and lettuce grown in the shade, and similar items; and drink pigeon soup, and eat turtle meat, and moist meats.
and drink pigeon soup, and eat turtle meat, and moist meats. And he who has a cold constitution should take syrup of honey, and half-old-half-new fragrant wine, and eat broth, and eat young sparrows and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day he will be cupped, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some people occasionally tragacanth or nutmeg before cupping, or after, to comfort the main limbs; and let the drink be subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
The cups that are applied without cutting are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and for gout, and on the abdomen and buttocks and thighs and hip, because these limbs do not tolerate being cut, and we only make them bleed to draw blood from one member to another, just as we apply them to the breasts when a woman is nursing;
To remove the viscosity which is in the member, as we put suction cups on the belly and on the throat to reduce the swelling of the limb;
and remove the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power it might remove the obstruction, or dislodge the stone from its place;
and in this way it acts when placed upon the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and at other times filled with warm water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in such a manner that the suction cup is filled with hot water or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The form of the cupping vessel administered with fire is as follows:
And let there be two fingers wide and half a palm long, and at the edge in the middle let there be a small hole, as if to insert a needle, and it should be of iron, smooth so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
and in the middle let there be a crossbar of iron or steel to hold a candle securely, and they should vary in size both large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who use them;
for suction cups for children are different from those for the elderly, and for thin people than for fat ones.
And one should place this suction cup in the following manner on the limb:
Take the candle of wax or linen, and place it inside the suction cup over the shaft that is within the suction cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cup that it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and your two fingers should be over the opening we mentioned, so that when you want to, the steam goes in, and remove the suction cup;
and take the linen as before, and do it often, if you need to.
In the suction cup used for treating pleurisy, there is no shaft or opening, and it is only applied when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb solely;
and this is the form:
Sanuous should not be applied except to parts where suction cups cannot be used due to their small size, such as the lips and gums, and similar areas; and on parts bare of skin, such as the palms or soles, and other similar areas;
and the quality of the application is such that when you find sanuous that are in mild conditions and clean for removal, take them;
and place one in mild liquid until they become familiar and have nothing in their interiors; and then cleanse the area with a vein and suction cup, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the sanuous on it;
And when they are full, and fall off, if it is a place where one can apply suction cups, then apply them, for this is very beneficial afterwards.
If not, then lift the area with ease, and then with water, very well, and then compress it;
and if the place heals too quickly after the suction, then moisten the cloth of linen in cold water and apply it until the wound is spread out;
and if the wound is multiplied, then apply ground vitriol, or gallnuts, and similar things until it is spread out;
and you place half of peeled beans on the area, and leave them until they dry out there, it will now be staunched;
And if you need more, then take other veins.
And if the veins do not wish to be taken, then rub the place of fresh blood where you insert a needle so that the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will harden;
and when you see that they drip, then sprinkle a bit of aloes and frankincense powder, or ashes, and now they will stop dripping.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it pertains to the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Beware, foolish physician, that they throw themselves into this chapter, having never seen any of the ancient books, nor read any letters in them;
And for this reason, the art is rare in our land, for I have never found anyone good at it;
and I know nothing except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I now understand the art, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained within it, and I have summarized at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the speech and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain occurs to anyone, you must hurry to treat the patient from both sides if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of body, children, or elderly people; when the time is neither too hot, nor too cold;
and eat cold things, that is to say cold broths, and meat of birds and goats, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overfill yourself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no fear of a hot abscess or an outpouring of matter in the limb;
if the patient returns to sleep under primary governance that he has used.
And when the broken bones begin to restore themselves, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that provide thick nutrition, which are viscous, such as boiled wheat in water, rice, and heads, feet, and belly of fish, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For such nourishment promotes healing and the fracture heals more quickly.
And know that the bones broken of old and infirm people cannot be well reset or set according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs, nor can those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but do not worry, reset on the broken bone with four fingers that hold and join the limb together, as long as it strengthens as it was before; and do not restrict him from his work, and for this reason he should be fed rich foods, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the hip, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in sharpening, like the shaft of a quill for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in sharpening, like the shaft of a quill for writing. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that is just a small crack.
And each method has its own technique, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory brings to mind;
and a broken bone is known by the fact that the limb is twisted, and it is clearly visible by its deformity, and sounds hollow when pressed with the hand;
and when there is no twisting or sound upon pressing, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no break;
but it may have a twist, or split, or small fracture. It is not necessary to move it with your hand, but apply the medicines that come next, and then press it now gently.
And you should know that the fracture that goes through the bone, and where the two parts are separated, they must now be placed equally so that pus does not form between them;
and if pus forms there, leave it for some days until the abscess is resolved;
then place it evenly as you can lightly and carefully, and know that the healing of this is easier than the healing where there are pieces;
then compress it as is appropriate afterwards.
And if there are broken bone pieces, secure them from both sides, whether it is the hand or foot, or use two cords, or one cord and your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural position, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, reset all additions in their places as much as you can, and ensure that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
and properly align the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
And check carefully with your hand if it seems to you that it is not right:
if you set it properly, and do not pull too tightly, nor press so as to cause inflammation and contraction of the limb due to their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is properly set, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor in turning, nor in any other manner; and ensure that the limb is securely set so that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels any pain, it is not properly set, and it must be placed in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
and ensure that the limb is securely set so that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels any pain, it is not properly set, and it must be placed in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and be careful that it is placed correctly, so that no curvature comes about when it is restored;
and the condition of the broken limb follows what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and thumbs and similar ones: It is necessary to wrap strips of soft and fine linen; and for those that are thick, such as the thigh and leg:
it is necessary to wrap with a wide and firm bandage, because the wide bands encircle the entire large limb evenly, so there are no gaps.
then wrap with light rollers, three or four times around the limb, and press your hand slightly on the entire bandage, then go above the fracture and press less, so that the fracture can be slightly separated.
and gradually loosen the bandage little by little until you cover a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap it again over the fractured area.
Then return to the part on the side of the fracture and compress it moderately, neither too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first chapter above;
Then place cotton or cloth strips between the bandages so that they are all even, then wrap everything with a bandage, and then apply your well-made splints if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply a hot abscess poultice that reduces the swelling, and leave it like this for several days;
Then apply bandages over your splints, and let them be about half the width of a palm strip, or made from wood used for cleavers, or from palm ribs, and shape them as follows:
but it is necessary that the splint which one places on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others;
and it should also be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether short or long; then secure it over the splints just as you did in the first hour, then wrap with bandages as you did for the fracture in the first hour; tighter above, looser below;
and the bandages should be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;
for if the bandages are too thick, as I have seen in the work of fools who wrap their bandages with twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, because the wrapping cannot be even if it is too thin, and it is not appropriate that there should be less than two fingers' width between each splint.
And if the patient is pierced by the tips of arrows after they are drawn from their wounds, place cotton plugs or linen strips beneath them so they do not pierce further.
When the wound is with the splinter, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
And you should know that it is not appropriate to extract all the splinters from broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, one should not apply splints forcefully until after five days or seven, or more according to your judgment of a hot abscess ensuing;
and see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
and take flour that is kept in the mill walls, and mix it abundantly with eggs, and apply this preparation neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of a plaster restoring fractures in many positions, especially for women and children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Another manner of plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take honey and labdanum and storax and asafoetida and Arabic gum and mastic, each ten parts. Take myrrh and aloes, each five parts. Take vinegar of bile nine parts. and make a powder, and mix with the yolk of an egg; If the constitution of the person is hot, use this plaster, for it is well composed, and quickly restores broken bones, and is good for many people.
Another way of making a plaster that is good for sprains: Take mugwort and wild leek, one handful each; take myrrh and aloes, nine handfuls each; take acetite, six handfuls; take Armenian bole ten handfuls, and grind well, and mix with water or the yolk of an egg, and administer.
Another method of poultice for joints and bones out of place, which eases the pain that occurs, and helps heal the use of the bone, and fractures: take new wool, and boil it in oil, and apply to the affected area.
This plaster does not heal, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and properly relieves pain.
Another way of applying a plaster to restore broken bones: take dried mulberry leaves and terrestrial plantain leaves, and grind them together, then make a plaster.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of a broken bone and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of vervain, of each one part;
and grind it, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another way of making an ointment stronger than the first one, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of chamomile, seeds of flax, baluster, honey lotus, and saussurea, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates states in his book that one should not place anything on a broken limb to restore strength except for cerotic wax made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be neither too hard nor too soft.
And Galen seems to suggest that for restoring a broken limb, dry and slightly warm things should be applied, such as myrrh, aloes, and incense, and similar items, as we have said.
Another way of making an ointment that is good for injuries and pain: take mastic and chopped human hairs, or bird feathers, and equal parts of herb vervain, and grind them, and make an ointment and mix it well.
And then loosen it a little after, and be careful if the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not loosen it by hand for days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster now;
and take a light cloth, and a sponge soaked in seawater, and apply it to the area, until the itching stops, and the pain is eased; then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry wool soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a pad until you are sure of a hot abscess;
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and relieve the pain, then restart the gentle bandaging, and a little plaster, and do not strain it as strongly as before; and carefully until he is well.
And if you see that the abscess is red and swollen and painful and has pus throughout, and you need to apply a poultice and bandage, then restart as you did first equally.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, do not dislocate it until after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the bone fracture heals, and the joint approaches proper alignment;
then restrain it more than before, and let the flesh grow, as I said earlier;
and if you see the area dry more than necessary, know that no new flesh can come there; apply warm water compresses, every time you dislocate it, and do this every third day, and loosen the bandage a bit;
Through this work then, correct the positioning of the limb, and quickly remedy what the foolish doctor does, who resets the limb abruptly:
It is harmful, and such work is dangerous, and I see nothing else but the need to leave it and perform it correctly.
There are many types of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
for there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the force removes all the bone up to the surface beneath it, as if splitting wood; and for this reason, this type of fracture is called a "splitting" or "chopping.
When the sword strikes the bone without piercing it, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute";
and the wound from these two fractures is large or small.
And if there is an embedded impact, or a fissure from falling on stone, or from other similar incidents.
And if there is a fracture that approaches the membrane under the bone, or is on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as fine as a hair, and the crack is small, and for this reason it is called a "capillary" fracture;
and there is a wound caused by being hit by a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, which causes a bone fragment to enter below the skin, and the place becomes bruised as if blacksmiths were hammering on their anvils; and a stone enters inside.
And this happens more often to those who have wet bones at their head, such as an infant's head;
and in all these types of fractures, small pieces become dislodged as if they were loose; and I will speak about it in its place.
And we recognize all manners of fractures by the depression on them, and the inquiry with probes, and by the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
The hairline fracture is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubbed it, the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of the fracture, be mindful of the patient's symptoms, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsions, paralysis, intermittent fever, and eyes protruding and reddening, along with other similar conditions in many cases, they cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any alarming symptoms and hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounded person first comes to you, and it is in winter, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day from the wound that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not become corrupted, and prevent the accidents we have mentioned.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the tissue that covers the brain, then you must split the broken part as follows:
and it is that you take the patient's head in your hands, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and around the shape of the wound as deeply as you can, and if blood flows out upon uncovering the bone, or an abscess appears, with the help of what is needed, and it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the swelling is eased, and be assured of the cessation of blood flow; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to two methods of work:
one method is that you cut closely around the incision, and this is the form:
And then make the other incision larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have various cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be sharp, and made of iron;
and work gently so that you do not injure the head.
And if the bone is hard and protruding, you must pierce around it gently, thus applying cuts with chisels, but not deeply enough to penetrate beyond the skull bone, and it should have a margin or circle above the tip so that it does not allow the point to go beyond the bone;
and you must have several of them so that each comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have splinters for all parts of the head;
and this is the form of the three kinds of splinters:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place one splinter on the bone, and turn it until you know that the bone is pierced;
then place the splinter slightly apart elsewhere, and do this all around, then cut into the bone spaces between the holes, and do this more carefully than you can, and gently, as we have said, until you draw out the bone with your hand, or with any of the tools you have such as forceps, pincers;
And make sure you do not touch the brain or the cerebellum.
And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, then you must close the aperture that remains in the bone with an instrument similar to a lancet, but it must be thinner and finer than other lancets.
And if any small bones or fragments remain, remove them gently with the instrument; Then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have described.
And the other method of work is that which Galen described, which is more skillful; And he praises it very much, and this is his speech. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture has moved out, so that when you have uncovered this part, you place below the head of this chisel, here is its form:
And it does not cut from one side, and the part is angled on both sides, so that the cutter faces the bone;
then tap it gently with a small mallet, so that you lightly groove the bone all around, and be very careful of the tissue below;
if it is adhered to the bone, remove it gently, for it must be removed without harm, and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, with small pieces, then it is necessary behind that roughness, to remove the scales with a fine scraper of which you must have various quantities, to apply in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Start with large scrapers and then use finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
In each of the other hair cuts and fine fractures, you must treat according to their alignment;
And this is something that is not answered by one who has devoted his study to this art.
And if the wound is exposed, then you should take a piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another piece of linen folded in two or three layers, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first piece of linen; and apply it as lightly as you can, so as not to burden the wound, then cover it with another cloth, and do not tighten it more than necessary to just cover the wound;
and leave it thus for one or two days until the swelling is reduced, then unbind it, and administer medicines such as lily root, flour of oats, powder of incense, arsitolochia, and similar things;
and from these things make powder, and apply it to the wound, and immediately administer cleansing medicines without incision;
and ensure that the wound is immediately clean, do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow pus to accumulate, because when pus accumulates on the brain's cloth-like tissue, it can cause damage and lead to great harm for the patient;
for when something irritating is applied to the surface, it can cause irritation from above. Therefore, pay attention if any harmful accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackness does not come from anything other than the medicine that you have applied, such power it has, then you must take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and mix one drop, and put it on the surface; then treat it in the manner of treatments that are necessary until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the skull above are broken, or just one part, because these are two bones;
and the one below is made of cartilage and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your small finger or probe into the nostril and place the break exactly within your finger, and outside the nostril according to its natural shape, until the nose returns to its original form; And do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the part above the nose, and cannot come to its place, then you must set it equally along a thin rod.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do likewise, and hurry to restore it on the first day if you can.
unless, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then apply to the head of the nose cloths of linen if the fracture is in one part.
Where you apply it on another part, if the fracture is there; and let the cloths be thick enough to fill the openings of the nose.
And some responders say that the tents should be lubricated with butter, and changed each day. It does not seem right to me that they should be used as is; they must be moistened in a preparation of egg white and powdered alum. Then leave the dressing on until the bone is hardened, and the cartilage is firm.
And sometimes one places goose feathers in place of dressings, and they are covered with a bandage, and the patient blows through them; do as you see fit;
And if abscesses come to the nose while you are working on them, apply plaster or cotton moistened in rose oil, or a little piece of myrrh.
And if abscesses are slow to come, apply a plaster around it, made of powdered fenugreek and frankincense, mixed with some egg white, then place light cotton on top, and do not tie the nose;
and if the nose is fractured in small pieces, remove them with appropriate instruments, then sew up the wound, and treat it with substances that promote flesh growth and healing, such as plasters and suitable ointments;
and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents, and place strips of linen, until he is healed.
When the mandible is fractured from below, and there is no wound to surface, and the fracture is only superficial, and it is not broken into two parts, except possibly a small chip inside, one can easily recognize this.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you place your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left side, place your index finger of the right hand, and gently press the fracture inwards, and stabilize it with the other hand from the outside, and make it even.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced in two parts, it is necessary to administer an extension of both sides until they are equal.
And if the movement of teeth occurs, or they are dislocated, then extract them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then place wax on the fractured jaw, and put two layers of cloth over it; and place on the cloth a large stake well made, or a piece of leather even, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it up as high as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the appearance changes, then unbind on the third day, and then properly reset what has changed. and place a plaster on it, of the powder from the mill with plenty of egg or sesamum flour, after you have removed the wax.
and place light wool over the plaster, and if the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until he is well. Often recovery takes three weeks.
And if abscesses come, then treat them as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, check if any piece of the bone has been removed; use appropriate instruments to carefully remove it.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, then close the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable plasters to it, to heal flesh until it is healthy.
The collarbone is often broken multiple times near the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
where it is broken and displaced into two parts with pieces remaining, and this is the easiest to restore;
where there is a fracture with a wound.
And when the fracture is without a wound, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder which is connected to the broken collarbone; and stretch the neck towards the affected part;
then align the fracture with your hands so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or change.
And if you need to stretch it further, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth, or wool, and let it be as large as necessary; and stretch and lift the muscle, and hold the ball with your hand so that you align the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the humerus out due to its position, then the patient must lie supine on their back, and place a medium-sized pillow under the shoulder, and the assistant should push the shoulder down until the bone of the humerus is raised.
And then set the fracture with your hands, and if you find it shattered, you must cut into it;
and draw together the bones gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any prominence, cut it with one of the knives that you have; but place aside this instrument to protect the surface:
and it resembles a spoon, and is not sharp, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
and it should have two edges, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound you made when you treated the bones;
and when you are sure of a hot abscess, sew the wound shut, and if the wound is small where you suspect a hot abscess, dress the wound with cloths and bandages according to its size.
And if painful abscesses come, moisten a cloth in rose oil and egg yolk and wine, and apply it.
The binding of the bone, when it is without cuts and without incisions, is that you put on the bone the plaster made from powder from the mill and yolk of an egg, and place light wicks over it, and put a sphere beneath the bandage if you need to. Then take a very wide bandage of one palm in width, then place the wicks over the light cloths, and apply the plaster. Then take a fine strip three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down. and place the strip over the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, under the healthy shoulder, and under the injured shoulder. And reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture in place, and clearly see that the bone does not move above the broken bone, then treat it each day, and as the ligaments loosen, secure them.
And have the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under him while he sleeps to lift the shoulder up. This will ease the fracture of the arm by aligning the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, until twenty days.
Then restart the poultice if you see it is needed, and bind it and leave it as such until he is restored.
and it is restored in twenty-eight days, and in fewer days for some men.
of the fracture of the shoulder
It rarely happens that the shoulder is broken either widely or in the middle, and one can only know this by touching it;
if you set it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
then place powder from the mill with an abundance of egg, and use light dressings, and put on one double cloth; then place a wide and fine board over it, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if any part of the board presses on the shoulder, pad that area with linen dressings so that the board rests evenly;
and then tightly bind it with a large bandage so that the bone does not move from its place, and examine the joint each day;
and every time it softens, bind it again, and place the bone back in its proper position if it has moved out of place, and have the patient lie on their side;
and the shoulder is reset in twenty days or twenty-five.
And when this number of days is complete, then release it, and be careful, for this is not a bone that easily returns to its proper place.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes and sticks out from near the heart, cut it off, and do as we have said regarding the fracture to alleviate a hot abscess.
of the fracture of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks upon removal.
And when it is fractured in the middle, it tilts outward, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks alignment, and swells, and sometimes vomits blood, and the movement of the bone can be felt through the skin.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies supine on their back, and places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the sides of the two shoulder blades with his hands, and gently aligns them equally in all ways that he can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then applies plasters and inserts a light stick wrapped in salt, or another light material, above the fracture gently, and wraps it around the broken bone so that it does not move; and wraps the bandage smoothly around the back, and tightens it gradually, and checks each hour the wrapping, and if it loosens, then tighten it;
And if it needs to be loosened, for corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and scrape off the plaster, and address what has come from treatments in various ways;
then reapply the plaster, and press it until it is secure.
Of the fracture of the ribs
Know that the breaker of ribs does not cause pain except in their large parts behind the back and at the front, and they only hurt because they are bruised; and one feels it well during examination of the back.
And the restoration is that you place the fracture evenly as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage if you need to.
And if the break of the ribs is inwardly displaced, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue; And he spits out points, and soon vomits great quantities of blood, and this is from severe illness, and the elderly have much fear about it.
And there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture outwards.
We do not do this, that abscesses may not come, if they have already come. And if they have come, then heal them.
And some say that one should place suction cups on the area to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is concern that the suction cups may not draw the excesses to the area due to the disposition of weakness.
And some say that one should cover the area with wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to evenly distribute the poultice, then treat it according to the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone piercing the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the area of the broken rib, and an instrument must be placed underneath to protect the surface;
And then one must cut the bone, and gently scrape it, and then sew together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if pus-filled abscesses come, place strips moistened in rose oil on them, and apply them to the area.
and treat the area as is appropriate for an abscess, and let them lie on their side on the side where it is necessary, until they are healed.
and similarly to the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will be well or not, observe if you see their hands soft, swollen, and dead-colored, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in many cases, and if they move and feel well when you pinch and prick them, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the patient can be treated, if proper care is applied.
And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is sound or not, observe if the feet are weak, and see if there are signs that can be felt by hand, and on the back feel for windiness and involuntary evacuation;
and when it is pressed upon its belly, there is involuntary evacuation. And when he is lying on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is fatal: do not attempt to treat it.
And if these accidents do not occur to him, then the matter is lighter.
And the treatment is that you observe if there is a hot abscess, then apply rose oil or chicken egg yolk to the spine until it subsides;
Then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let them sleep on that part where they feel the pain, until they are healed.
And if any bone breaks, it is necessary to cut into the chest; and remove the bone, then stitch together the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until they are healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the wrist," place your thumb from your left hand there and align it as best you can with your right hand, then apply the plaster and bandage, if necessary;
Then it is extracted, and if there are displaced bones, they cut them out, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the hip bone
It sometimes happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, there is often only a slight concussion to the head; and they cut it long, and it declines inwardly, and causes pain to the patient at the site, and stiffness, and swelling where it is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above it, until you are above the break; and identify where the fracture is and its shape;
And if the fracture is to the head alone, set it equal so that it has a natural shape.
And if the fracture extends along its length and tilts inward, make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture is prepared. And when you have set it equal, apply a plaster, then place a splint of wood or horn, and bind the fracture so that it does not move;
and support the area below the ribs, so that the sides are even. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
And if there is inflammation present, do not touch it, until the inflammation subsides, and then apply what we have mentioned before; and then return to the restoration, and bind it as is appropriate, if there is no harmful incident;
of the fracture of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is what is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two methods:
one of which is that you take one staff filled with medicinal material, in this form:
And tie the two heads with two straps, and pull them up, and seat the patient on a chair;
then place the broken arm on the staff, up to the armpit, and have it bend at some point, then pull with some heavy object or have someone hold it down;
Then the physician should place the splint equal to his hands together, so that the splint returns as it should.
And the other method is that you lift the patient onto his back, and tie the hand to his neck, then instruct two assistants that one pull from above at the point where it meets the hands, and the other pull from below along the entire length, stretching each part accordingly.
And if you wish for the extraction to be stronger, then remove the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the muscles to their part.
And if the splint is near the top of the shoulder, you should place one bandage underneath the armpit, and the other towards the side, beneath the splint;
and similarly if the splint is towards the side, you should place one bandage lightly, without effort, so that the splint is even on its position and at the side;
Then place the splint evenly as it should be, and secure it, unless abscesses occur.
And if abscesses occur, do not secure it at all for seven days, and place linen soaked in warm oil of roses on it until the abscesses are calmed;
Then it is bound, and the manner of binding is that you place the plaster on the fracture, then bring the arm up to the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest;
and apply the bandage, and bind around the shoulder, and the arm, so that the arm is in a fixed position, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has moved.
And if you fear that the bone will move, use splints, and place on the fracture one splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint a space of two fingers, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three finger-widths on each side;
Then strain on the stars, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about the fracture, more strongly and less in pulling apart.
And if you see the position of the bones and the compression, as we have said, when you restore the broken limb, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said;
then check the bandage every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur at the site where healing cannot reach due to it being too tight. If he is positioned as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, do not loosen it before three days or more, and have the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach;
and place under the shoulder a cushion filled evenly with wool, and observe every hour of day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, nor soften the ligaments;
if it is restored by the power of medicine, and give him the meat that we mentioned earlier, in such a way that the meat is initially finely prepared; and when he begins to recover, it should be more substantial.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be treated for forty days in total; and then it should be loosened and administered baths and ointment medicines to heal the area;
And if the constriction is tight and stuck, wait one day or two months to loosen it.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "humerus", of which one is small, and it is the one that contains the socket;
and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the small toe;
by chance, the large humerus may be broken alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small humerus is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, the healing is difficult, and worse than when both are broken together.
If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it must be gently stretched out, and placed evenly.
And if it is the large humerus, then it must be pulled more firmly;
and lay him upon one cushion, and raise the poultice of the hand higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and let the patient lie crossed upon himself, and place a cushion before him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any discomfort;
then extend the assistants' arms to the side of his hand, or at the joint, and another assistant on the other side above.
And then place the bone evenly, according to its natural form.
And if there are fragments in the break, place each one in its place, and if any fragment is displaced and pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut into it and remove it, as we have said before.
And if with the surgical knife for wounds, I have spoken of it in a separate chapter; then proceed with the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration abscesses occur, then apply a strip of cerate made from rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and lift the poultice gently, until the abscess is sufficiently reduced.
Then remove the cerate, and apply the poultice made from the powder of the mill with plenty of egg, then place the bandages, and let the bandage at the wound be tighter, and a little wider than the others;
and note that there should be six bandages on the arm in various positions: whether the break is in one bone or in two;
and tighten it more near the break than elsewhere, and gradually less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough;
and let the bandages on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, of which it is composed, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And examine the limb and the joint after several days. And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should sprinkle the limb with warm water until the itching is alleviated;
and let the limb rest without being too constricted.
And then resume the compression, and if the joint is weakened and the bone dislocated, and similar things, address them.
And be wary if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it slightly, and leave it this way for several days until the swelling subsides, and then compress it.
And if none of these things we have mentioned come to the patient, then do not unbind them until twenty days.
and have him lie down, then he can place his hands on his neck, and let his necks be even, and beware of movement and shaking, and sleep on his back;
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and sometimes in twenty days, according to the composition and the natures of the virtues.
Of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and on the thumb there are few fractures, and it often results in sprains rather than fractures.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to sit with a splint, and sit straight in front with it evenly;
then place his hand on the stretched cloth, and the attendant stretches the broken bones, and aligns them evenly, until they are well joined;
and apply the plaster and bandages, unless abscesses occur, then place a splint according to the size of the area; and wrap it in one piece of linen cloth.
And if the fracture is in the middle of the sole of the foot, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to bind it to their fractured sole; and then bind it with a long cloth strip, and make the splint as thick as the palm of the hand, and bind it as is appropriate.
And if the fracture is on the side, then you should place a stick above and another below the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight, then bind it quickly around the hand, and secure the binding between the two sticks.
And if the fracture occurs at one of the bones on either side, and it is displaced, set it evenly as is appropriate; and bind it with the sole, and if you wish, place a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not allow movement;
and if the fracture is in one of the other bones, such as in the index finger or any other, set it evenly, and bind it with the adjacent uninjured bone; where you tie them all together as it moves, or place on a splinter, like a poultice;
and be careful in the restoration and disposition of a hot abscess, and support those who come to it, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward;
and the restoration is such that you tie one bandage above the break and another below. And the patient lies on their back, then each helper stretches their bandage equally on their side;
and this is when the break is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, one of the ligaments should be towards the groin, and the other ligaments below the break.
And if it is near the knee, then let the bandage be near the knee, and let the extension be below.
Then let the physician place the bone evenly with both hands until it is according to its natural position, and then apply the plaster, and bind it, so that abscesses do not occur.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside, then return to your work and treatment; the bandaging is done in such a manner.
You should wrap the broken area with one bandage doubled over two or three times, and remove any excess, then turn the leg so that the heels align with the root of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee, with the end of the thread above.
Then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh, then place splints on it, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
Then place eight folds of cloth between the leg and thigh to make the compression even, then begin to bind tightly three times or four above the splint; and as you go up towards the splint, bind less tightly;
then take the two ends of the thread you placed between the leg and thigh, and tie three splints that are above it, then go back behind to the head of the thread until you reach near the foot;
and bind it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or swelling or similar occurs. And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes next, as we have said many times;
and if there are fragments of bone that cause pain, then they must be removed, if possible; and if it cannot be done, then cut the area and draw out the force; and treat it as we have said, until he is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that splints must be applied, as with the shoulder and arm;
nevertheless, in the restoration done this way, the patient does not suffer.
And know that the thigh is restored in 21 days, or a few less or more, according to the diversity of constitutions.
Know that in the joint of the knee there is often fracture, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is usually just a crack, or a perforation, and it becomes like any other wound, and feels like any other wound, and this people feel well.
And the restoration is such that one sets equal those that are bent at their elbows, until they are assembled as much as possible;
then apply the plaster, and if needed, place a round splint, and secure it as is appropriate, then attend to all the precautions we have mentioned for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions; and apply to each injury what is appropriate for it, until he is healed.
Of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by its proper name "mustelz," and the other is called "foscile";
and it happens that any other fracture occurs as it does in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is done accordingly. And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
And if the thin bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly; and turn away from it.
Then treat with extension, and place it evenly, and bind the splints equally;
but nevertheless, if the break is severe and there are many pieces, the treatment should be gentler and lighter; and proceed according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of wood that will bind the leg from both sides, and let them extend along the length of the leg from the knee down;
Then wrap it in two layers one bandage above and below, and place it in the middle as well, and at this point the leg will not be able to turn to either side, and thus it is well;
and some administer one bandage along the length of the leg, and if it is made of wood, they place it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly this is done in the fracture where there is an open wound;
and move the leg each day to check for an abscess or other accidents; treat it until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but in the bones of the foot there sometimes is a fracture and at the two joints, and it does not happen that it splits in many cases.
And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones protrude over each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if they wanted to walk, and then now put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, and then press so that they return to their places;
Then apply the plaster and stoppers on it, and place a small tablet filled with two spoonfuls under the bottom of the foot, then bind it tightly to the foot after wrapping it in cloths, and other things you need.
And when three or four days have passed, undo the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two is broken, repair them as we have said about those of the hand; Then place a splint on the broken toe according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then place under the foot the tablet I mentioned, and bind it tightly;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken toes, place a splint on each according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen cloth, and bind the tablet under the foot; And let it stand on top of the table so as to avoid the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said to the other surgeons, as we have mentioned; and treat each incident as is appropriate.
of the fracture of the bone of the thumb
When the bone of the woman's pelvis is broken, have her sit extended, then incline her towards the part of the back, and let her be held from behind;
then fill the area of the woman's pelvis with cotton, and place in it as much as fits;
then have the woman stand up, and lift her back bit by bit, and then pull out the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the pelvis, and return the bone with the padding;
and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or so: the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie a tube to the opening, and insert the entire bladder into the body; then blow forcefully into the tube until the bladder is inflated inside: the bone will return to its proper place;
then fill it with cotton and leave it like this for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have described for the hip bone;
And these fractures are not hidden from one who applies his study and practice to them, and my book makes this clear.
For the fracture indicates in various ways the proper path for its restoration: Therefore, understand this.
In the case of a broken shaft, take a goose quill and insert the shaft into it; then wrap strips around it, and leave it for three days while keeping it wrapped, and it will heal quickly.
of a break with a wound
It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be treated immediately, so that the treatments we have mentioned testify to this.
And if the wound heals, then cauterize it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then resume restoring the fracture at the same hour, or on that day, unless abscesses occur.
And if abscesses occur, then leave the restoration until a new day, until the abscesses are eased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad outcome.
And if the broken bone is visible on the exposed chest, then you should gently set it with your hands, making small adjustments.
And if the extension is not available to match your hands, then use this iron instrument which is seven or eight inches long, and its width corresponds to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the physician to use III or IIII, according to what he needs for each treatment of fracture;
and let it be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not bend under the compression on the limb during your work, and sharp in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", for which the curved head should be placed on top of the visible bone; and push it in at once, until it fits, and let them be even with each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone until the instrument has enough purchase.
And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either an incisor or saw, as your ability allows;
Then raise what is delayed in the bone of hardness and small scales.
And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Place it back in its place, then moisten the joint with black styptic wine, and do so properly if it is during summer. and do not put cerate or anything else with oil on the wound, as it may cause putrefaction and corruption;
then bandage it after you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not constricted with the fracture;
and many times foolish physicians have done this, and it has led to the death of the patient or corrosion of the wound at times; And let the bandages be looser and softer than for other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that harmful accidents may occur as we have said, and if pain is present, then it is not appropriate to apply hot compresses. but wrap around it, instead of hot compresses, hard cloths, and secure them.
And when you see after one day or two that the wound is swelling with pus, remove what you have put over it of all wine, and apply an ointment healing wounds, such as tetrafarmacos ointment and similar.
And it is necessary that you untie the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the pus flows down lightly.
And if many days pass and it cannot heal but pus keeps returning, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must probe the wound with a probe, and remove all these displaced fragments that cause the pain.
And if a fistula comes to that place, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
And when the bone is fractured and apparent on the limb, such as in the thigh or shoulder bones, and other similar large limbs, do not attempt to set it, for many times death results, but leave it until it heals by itself.
By chance it may fall from him after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can.
and if you cannot, leave it be.
We often see this after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a terrible sight to behold the shape of the limb; and by chance it may not be able to perform its natural functions.
Take care then if the wound is fresh: then administer astringent medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others; take any of these things or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with egg whites or honey. and place them on the knot with plugs, and bind tightly, and do not loosen it for several days;
and place them on the knot with plugs, and bind tightly, and do not loosen it for several days; and then dislocate it again, and repeat with another, until the knot is removed;
where you should bind over a well-made piece of cloth; for the properties of the cloth are such that they remove all swellings from the limbs;
and if the knot has already hardened like a stone and needs to be removed, then cover it with something, and the excess will become apparent; where you should refer it to a barber, until it is removed, and treat it until it heals.
of the limb which is weak after recovery
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate afterwards, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and the limb could not receive proper nutrition; or due to excessive bleeding; or because of too much movement, not at the proper time; or because they have little blood in their body, so they are weak.
And the treatment is that you should have the patient eat and make the body soft, so that the blood increases in him; and the minister bathes him, and gives him joy and ease;
then applies pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts the swelling, and frequently rinses it with cold water, until the swelling subsides onto the limb; and returns to its natural position.
of the limb twisted after the sickness When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone is clearly broken, and the form of the limb is ugly, it does not lose its natural function:
do not believe those fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
and these procedures are criticized, and great harm comes from them, and by chance death occurs;
nevertheless, if the joints and the tortures are fresh, they should be soaked in hot water, or herbs that soften should be boiled, such as leaves of mallows, roots, and hylotus, and similar things;
and you apply a softening poultice, such as well-made mastic, and take the mallows mucilage, and mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply a poultice on top;
or take fat figs, and crush them with linseed, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
And sometimes the knot is removed to rub continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And let motion be given to the limb every hour.
And if the twistedness is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, then it must be removed with iron, so it needs to be cut up to the bone, incising carefully; and apply pressure and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in someone, it is necessary to immediately return it to its proper place.
For if one delays, the area swells, and perhaps it will be reset with difficulty to its place;
because it is not appropriate to move it at the moment when it is swollen: many times it causes spasms and other pains;
nevertheless, when this happens, make the patient bleed, then leave them alone until the abscess is completely healed;
Then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb as the cure will come to its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head down to the feet.
It sometimes happens that the mandibles are dislocated on both sides, and the dislocation of both follows two methods: when they are slightly out of place and softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the worse side, causing saliva to pour from the mouth which it cannot hold back, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue around words.
When the dislocation is small, it returns on its own in many cases.
And if it is complete and severe, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay;
And in such a manner that the minister holds the head of the patient, and places his thumb in the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is from two sides; and the other hand should be placed away, to place it equally;
and instruct the patient to relax his jaws and move them in all directions. And the physician places it evenly, so that it returns to its place.
And if returning them is difficult, especially if both jaws are involved, soak them in warm water and oil until you can gently reset them;
do not delay in resetting them, as we have said.
And when they are returned evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes well to soften, then apply cloths moistened in pitch made of rose oil and wax, then bind lightly with soft bands;
and let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be placed between two cushions, so that he does not move it neither to the right nor to the left, nor try to bite down, but take light food until the pain is gone, and keep the jaws immobilized;
and then eat whatever he wants lightly, and do not force him to open his mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is well immobilized and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset properly in one hour, and are not returned to their places, it results in persistent fevers and habitual diarrhea, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know it is a sign of impending death; And many times the person who experiences this dies within nine days.
The dislocation cannot be reset from the side within the continuity of the ribs and the hip, and it is sometimes displaced outward, which one can clearly feel.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies supine on their back, and extends their arms; and then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then put on the poultice and bandage, and bind it tightly;
and the head that is toward the side cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
then put on the poultice and bandage, and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
And so likewise is reset the head of the spine when it has been dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways:
one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the socket on the rear side; and the second is at the part of the bottom; and occasionally it dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely;
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inward toward the nerves;
and it often dislocates to the rear toward the socket, especially in those with little flesh, because for them it happens more quickly;
For those who have enough flesh, it comes with difficulty, and it enters with difficulty.
And sometimes it happens to some people that they suffer a blow or fracture, and their shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And dislocation is known when it is towards the armpit, and it makes a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their differences evident; and you will find a depression at the top of the shoulder, and beneath the armpit towards the head of the shoulder, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move in any way;
And if it is reduced upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly upon feeling;
And this type of dislocation is not easily remedied when it is new, or if the child is ill.
And the method is that the practitioner lifts the hand of the patient up, then place your palms under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; And the practitioner lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it under; it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the medicine is made softening and soothing, such as a decoction of hellebore and fenugreek and honey-sweetened clover in water, and let it be prepared;
then let the patient lie on his back, and place under him a cushion of equal thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, then have the patient put his heel on the cushion, and lift the shoulder gently, and draw the arm of the patient;
and another attendant hold the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; the shoulder now returns completely, and if you wish to reset it according to this method:
and it is so that you have a man present who is larger than the patient; and stand opposite the patient's side, and place your shoulder under the arm of the patient, and lift the arm up so that the patient hangs by it. and another minister pull the patient's hand down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, something heavy may be placed with him, and now the dislocation returns.
And it is reset in another manner as well:
and it is that you insert a long rod into the ground, which should be as round as a pistol, and not too thick or thin; then place it under the patient, but make sure there is a cloth underneath, and the patient should stand on the long part of the rod;
Then extend his hand in the opposite direction, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return despite all the things we have said, then do this treatment: take an iron bar two feet long and four fingers wide, which has a rounded head to easily enter under the skin, according to this form:
then wrap the head of the bar with a cloth strip so that the metal does not hurt the patient, then place it under the skin of the patient;
and extend the arm over the long bar, and tie the shoulder onto the bar, and the hand at the head of the bar, then place the arm on a crossbeam of a wide ladder, and let the hand hang down, and let the body hang from the other side: The joint now returns to its place.
And when it is in place, however that may be, you must put under the seat a pad of equal wool, then apply the prepared poultice of ground powder with incense and egg yolk around the entire shoulder, then press down gently from underneath the seat, and wrap the bandage over the poultice, and bind the hand to the neck, and let the hand remain in this position.
And he should eat little until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal more quickly;
and then eat more after five days or seven, and move it; and if it is hard and not softened, it is healthy.
And if the joint is displaced due to moisture that has come into it, or for another reason, you should administer cauterizations with three openings as described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and after seven days it is loose and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, is made by impulse, and extension of hands, and another place ministers to it;
and care for it until it is healed.
And if after healing the limb becomes stiff and slow in movement, the patient should take many baths until the stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
of the dislocation of the elbow
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated by pins, and returns to place by pins;
and if it is dislocated from all sides, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not hidden, for one can see it well and feel it well; and dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the diseased part with the healthy part, then you can see clearly. For the joint is displaced, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder at all.
And you must reset it as abscesses often occur there, because if abscesses were to occur, it would be difficult to reset them;
and by chance cannot be completely restored, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance may lead to death.
And the restoration is such that when it can be brought back, you should extend their arm with both your hands; and their arms should be spread out, and the hands of the doctor around it, from above and below, and push the joint with both palms together, or at the base of the palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and strikes from the root of the palm the knife that is out of place.
And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong traction;
and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension;
then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped it with a double layer of cloth long and wide;
and when the physician joins the joint to the hand, he anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then forcefully sets the joint back into place until it returns;
and when it is in place, apply dry plasters with egg whites, and set it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for several days, then release it.
And if the joint is stiff in its place, loosen the ligament, and leave it;
and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, repeat the plaster and ligament, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then loosen it.
And if he feels stiffness after the return of the joint and it moves, bathe and rub it gently, and press until it is relieved; and place a piece of fat lambs wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; and when it sweats, gently rub the joint, then put on the salve, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times until he is healed;
and if you wish, place moistened vinegar wool heated with butter on it;
it will return to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the finger joints is easy to reduce, more so than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to return it to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the limb does not swell or become hot with an abscess.
And the reduction is such that you place the affected hand on a table, and the assistant extends the arm, and the physician places it evenly, so that the palm rests above the appearance of the joint, and presses until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must check if it is in place; then have the patient place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and the physician place his hand upon that part of the joint.
If it returns now, it is well. If not, apply soothing plasters to the abscesses and leave it as such without repeating.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after several days, the joint remains twisted;
and it does no harm to the patient other than that the hand is softened, and cannot grasp anything properly: then you know that the nerves are severed, or the artery;
there is no other remedy but to cauterize near the wound, and perhaps nothing else will help.
And when it is in place, apply the plaster we have mentioned, then press and leave it for five days, then untie it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well and there is some stiffness, apply hot water to it, and rub until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the thumb of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or the front;
then they should be stretched, and the dislocation pushed back into place until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and move it towards the part where it is disjointed;
and leave it for two days, and then make it even on that day;
and tie it as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and move it, and tie it at night;
and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;
and do the same when it is dislocated on another part.
of the dislocation of the backsplice
When the dislocation of the back or neck occurs, and there are many such dislocations, there is no cure, for death quickly follows the patient.
And the signs are that the patient jumps up involuntarily, and cannot hold still, and many times a limb becomes weakened, such as both legs or both arms or one.
And many times the thigh moves to four parts;
the one that moves backward is called "gibosity":
the treatment is to check if the gibosity has come from childhood: then there is no cure or healing possible.
And the one that comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment speak in grand words, but they are of no great benefit in all cases;
but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the clubfoot that comes from the big toe, there is neither cure nor remedy;
and also the one that comes directly to two sides, and cannot be cured except by the proper method for those coming from the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient lie stretched on his back in an equal place, and have someone behind him to support him so he does not injure himself;
then place a torch at the head in the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a rope under the armpits of the patient, and one at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two ministers hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two torches;
and let them be well closed, the torch as we have said, and the physician place his palms on the spine firmly, until it relieves.
And if it does not relieve with this treatment, take a board three arms long, and place it under the wall, and have the patient lie on their side, then put the end of the board under the wall, and place the middle of the board over the spine; and have the physician place his feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly, until it returns to its place;
and if you wish, do it with the rotary device that turns by hand. And place two torches at the head of the patient on one side of the body, and near their feet two others, with a palm's width between each torch above and below;
and make a hole in each torch where the flame turns, and secure the torches firmly in the ground so they do not move;
and between each pair of torches place one rotating torch, around which the ropes will be wound, and between two rotating torches have two small torches spaced by a palm's length to guide the rotation;
and then tie the rope that is between the chairs to the rotating device near the head, and the other rope near the feet to the other rotating device, and each attendant turns their respective rotating device for the entire length of the rope, and the master adjusts the tension evenly as we have described.
And when it is even, apply a desiccative plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the bandages, and then a stick three digits long to cover the area of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then wrap it as we have said, and the patient should use gentle nourishment until they are well.
and if any condition arises at the end of the recovery, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, along with the stick that we mentioned previously; and sometimes a piece of plaster is applied, and at times the appearance occurs in the last vertebra of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that is exposed, for which one must not presume anything: it might inadvertently cause death.
Know that at the joints of the hip and the shoulder, only dislocations occur, not like other joints;
and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and in front and behind;
and more inwardly than otherwise, and the socket is dislocated in front and behind.
And the recognition of an inward dislocation is that when joining the affected leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the patient's knee is more apparent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee towards the fire; And the place which is near the swollen abscess is hot, because the thigh bone comes there.
And the signs of him who is coming to faint are contrary to those mentioned before.
And the signs of one who is affected in front are that they straighten their leg according to the completion; nevertheless, the knee does not double up due to pain, and if one wants to make it move forward, it cannot go ahead, and they retain their urine, and the ankle swells, and when they walk, they step over the heel.
And the signs of him who is afflicted from behind are that he cannot extend his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is in a position below the ribs.
The treatment for this type of dislocation is that you check if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, without any specific remedy; And it does not suit him to have confidence/arrogance.
And for the one whose dislocation is fresh, and this is of the four types of dislocations, hurry to return the joint, and stretch it in and out, and move it right and left; perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and forcefully stretch the leg with two hands, or use a rope tied above the knee; and another assistant extends his hand above in such a manner that he places his hands under the buttocks, then tightens it with a strong rope on the thigh; and hold the head of the ligament;
and extend both upwards and downwards at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground in one motion, and let them hang suspended.
This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then it is necessary to apply treatment as appropriate.
When the dislocation is inward, you must lift the patient onto their healthy side, then place the ligament at the root of the thigh, and the area below the joint, then extend the ligament upwards towards the joint, and towards the muscle;
then have another helper take his arms, and embrace the thick part of the affected thigh, and extend it forcefully outward: It will return to its place now;
and this type of dislocation is less severe than the others.
And if you cannot secure it in the manner we have described, then you must bind both of the patient's feet together with a strong cord just above the two heels, and also over the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two palms longer than the other;
then hang them from a beam so that they are two arm lengths above the ground;
then instruct one assistant to embrace the thigh of the patient, and have another assistant hang with the patient, who firmly embraces the thigh, because the joint will now quickly return.
And when the dislocation is out of place, the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of those with cramp, and tightly bind the limb on the affected leg, and similarly on the other side;
then place two torches, one at the head and one at the feet, then insert a torch between the thighs of the patient in the proper position; and place wet cloths around it so that it does not burn the patient, then each assistant extends toward him, and the physician places his hand equally on the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, place him on the table and press as we have said in the case of gout, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to quickly extend the affected leg as I have said; And let the surgeon apply pressure to be above the joint of the patient, then press with the other hand, and straighten it towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is posterior, it does not suit to straighten the patient downwards, nor lift them up, but rather they should be as if the hip were dislocated posteriorly, as we have said about lying on both hips; and let them lie on their face, and the limb extended as we said before, and one should press on the joint to the table; and it will be right when the patient stretches their legs, and they will be even; then apply the thighs, and place the plaster, and secure it with a bandage so that the thigh does not move; and rest for three days or four, then remove it and apply the plaster again;
and if you see that they are even, then secure them as before, and leave it for three days;
then remove it, and have him walk gently, until the limb is healed.
Of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward;
And do not reset it before.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not stabilize at the thigh, you know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his chest, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly; and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it stabilizes at the thigh lightly;
and apply the plaster on it, and raise the leg to the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three days or four, then release it;
and the patient does not labor to walk until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not properly aligned, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is set right
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and feels loose at the part where it is dislocated:
the reduction is easy, and it should be gently guided with his hands when it is slightly moved.
And when it is quickly reset, you must make the patient sit upright, and have one assistant hold him a foot away from the leg, above the ankle;
Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand, then do it twice with your left hand, then place it up high, and forcefully push the foot upwards;
and do this twice as we have said, both in pushing and pulling the foot;
if it returns, that is good;
if not, then restart the work, for it will return;
and if it cannot return this way, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a stick firmly in the ground between their thighs, and tie ropes around them so that the patient does not move;
Then the ministers should hold the thigh, and another minister stretches out the foot in his hands or on a frame, where he binds it at the neck of the foot; Then each minister should stretch equally, and the patient should be immediately between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient steady when they are stretching him;
Then the doctor should place the dislocated limb equally in his hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg behind, and the dislocation will quickly return to its proper position.
And when it is properly set, apply the plaster and dressings firmly, bind the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage is not too tight;
then leave it for two days or three, and if the ligaments soften, then stretch them;
then untie it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before this period, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if painful abscesses come, you must soothe them as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
of the two When both are dislocated, they must be gently extended without strain, and this is an easy task.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back of the foot, then you must have the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and place your foot on what appears to be the joint, then press hard with your foot until it returns;
and when it is even and nothing appears out of place, then place under the sole of the foot a board two fingers wide, then stretch forcefully, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and I make him rest until he is well.
of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies:
do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not patient and merciful and not hasty;
and use at the beginning soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place so that the hot abscesses do not spread;
And when the limb is in place, administer things soothing to an abscess heat, and treat the wound as it should be with dry ointments;
And if with the dislocation there is a fracture and small bones displaced, remove them and do as we have said in simple diseases;
And guard against entering the path of fear as I have said, for it leads you astray according to your Creator, and for the sake of your skill and your body.
