O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O thou, dearest son, I have completed this book which is the last of medical knowledge together with its fulfillment; and have brought it to an end by its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And there came unto me in vision that I should complete it for thee with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and has been entirely destroyed throughout, therefore its science has perished and been cut off; and there remains nothing but small descriptions about it in books which hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this ignorance and vanity have come, and intentions are closed and the science has been forgotten.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	But it seems to me that I desire to revive this science together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and also to bring the forms of cauterizing irons and other instruments of the work along with their description and preparation, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who engages in this must rise up in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he may know the judgment of the members and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of joints, and the movement and the moving and resting veins, and the place of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hippocrates says that a name with no deed is much, but with a deed it is little; and the same is true in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say to you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things said above should guard against falling into error and killing men, as I have often seen many do who engage in this science without skill or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut off one aposteme of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; so that so much blood issued forth that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who removed a stone from the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; so he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to him to remove it, and saw the condition of the sick man and the greatness of the stone; and knew well that if it were cut into he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who took in hand the cure of one of our dukes who had his leg broken, and with the break there was also a wound; and the surgeon, full of ignorance, bound the break upon the wound with tight bandages, and did not leave any salve to the wound, and left him thus for some time. And he commanded that it should not be unbound; and so it remained until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come and unbind the leg; and when I had it unbound, he felt no pain at all.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the corruption was already well established in the member and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the whole limb was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another surgeon who burst open an inflamed carbuncle and then burned it through his own wickedness.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a carbuncle, when it is free from melancholic humor, ought not to be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you ought to know that surgery is divided into two parts: that is, the work where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Why it is necessary that you guard yourself so that foolish physicians cannot speak ill of you. If you take up your weapons in good conscience, and approach your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way, then by the grace of God you will come to salvation and be praised; and leave frightening diseases to those of grievous health; and put away your weapons from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the next in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galien says in some of his admonitions: 'Do not take on a bad disease as a patient, lest you be called a foolish physician.'
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	This treatise has been devised according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about hot cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is ordered from the head down to the feet; and it contains the forms of instruments, the irons for cauteries, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and puncturing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and the extraction of splinters and similar things; and it contains the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about reducing dislocations and torsions and similar things; and it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and contains the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we remember the work, it is necessary for me to tell you about the quality of the temperament and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of temperaments and their harm is the longest speech and most subtle science, and its secrets are difficult to answer. And about this most wise men have spoken and agreed among themselves. But I will give you few words because I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally every temperament where there is matter, except for two temperaments: namely the hot and dry temperament without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	Some people divide the hot and dry temperament with matter into two parts and say that cautery is great help there. But others say the opposite, that cautery is not good for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot,
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it many times through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	But let none meddle therein but he who hath tried it and knows well the book of cauteries by long experience, and the diversities of temperaments in men, their positions and causes of diseases, and seasonable times; concerning other temperaments we have no fear, especially cold moist ones.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians assembled and agreed upon the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, my son, that fire alone is the secret of remedies and has greater efficacy than a cauterizing medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple and acts only upon the member which it burns, and does not harm other members if one takes care.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Hot remedies spread from member to member and cause severe diseases in the limbs. But sometimes fire, due to its heat and goodness of substance, does not do harm if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it is based on the truth of things. Therefore, I apologize for the length of my speech, but I do not wish to deprive you of the secret contained in fire and the quality of its work, as the philosophers demonstrate; now receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they agreed upon the time when cauteries should be performed and chose priests.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the evils that occur are prevented by its help. Especially if the cauteries are necessary for sudden and urgent pains which cannot wait until greater mischief comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for a disease cured by cautery has no return. And they say so, but it is not entirely true because cauteries are medicines that alter the complexion and dry up the humors that cause pain, and they are more effective than medicines due to their swift action, virtue of their work, and sovereignty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it can happen that diseases arise according to the complexion of the patient and the location and nature of the disease. And they are assembled within him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in places where there is little superfluity or moisture, such as dental cauteries for toothache, etc., and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and indeed they are wrong; but they do not believe that cauteries have value after medicines. Their intentions are false, for when we administer various cures in any disease and they do not work, then we apply cauteries, which are effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient ones said that cauteries of gold are gentler than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high substance. They also said that the place where a cautery is applied does not cause decay, but this is not entirely true as I have seen in some people; however, cauteries of gold are indeed milder than those of iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	Moreover, when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell whether it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly. If you heat it too much in the fire, it will also damage it. Therefore, there are enough obstacles to this method.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	Therefore, we use cauteries of iron that have been more appropriately prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have arranged this chapter from head to toe so that it is easier to find the way.
dou cautere olivaire	olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moistness and coldness on the head. There are two types of it made due to the cause of an illness called "soda," and also because of many humors that flow down from the head to the ears and throat, causing numerous dreams, toothache, sore throat, and especially all illnesses that come from coldness like paralysis, sciatica, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is as follows: the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine that opens up the head for three or four nights, depending on the strength and age and constitution of the patient. Then apply the cautery to the back of the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have the patient sit crossed-legged between your hands and place their hands on their knees. Then place the root of your palm on the root of the patient's nose between their two ears. Wherever your middle fingers come together, make an incision there and then apply the cautery called "olivare" which has this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and press down gently but firmly while turning your hand back and forth. Then lift your hand slowly, and wait a moment to see if you can see the bone of about one inch in length; if not, then continue applying the cautery until you do see the bone as I have told you. Then take a small piece of wool, dip it into soft cotton, and place it on the spot and leave it for three days. After that, put moistened cotton soaked in butter on top of it and let it stay there until the burn is healed. Then treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacon" until it is completely healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that the more open the wound remains, the better it purges itself. Therefore, this cautery helps greatly with that.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	Some also say that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burnt, and then scrape off what has been burned from the bone and heal it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	Others say that one should leave the cautery on and press it so hard that a piece of bone about as large as a thread used for sewing by women is scraped off, so that humors can flow out more freely. Then the wound should be left open for a long time before being dressed and bandaged.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	But these two methods of cautery do not seem entirely good to me except in some cases where there is a risk of paralysis. Therefore, it seems best to leave them alone. Because the flesh becomes weakened by continuous solutions of nature as we see in other members, and especially when the flesh of the patient is naturally weak, the first method of cautery appears more cautious and gentle to me, and that is the one I use most often with good results.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	For chronic headache
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When a chronic pain comes in the whole head and lasts for a long time, the patient should use pills called "cochies," purgatives for the head, ointments, and plasters. If one applies the cautery I mentioned earlier without success.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be careful if the patient's flesh is strong and not too cold in nature, then apply the cautery a little below where you applied the one mentioned earlier.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, apply a cautery to each horn of the head up to the bone, as mentioned earlier, and apply one cautery to the spot called "vasselz," which is where cupping glasses are placed. Be careful not to press too hard so as not to burn down to the bone: the patient feels more pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak about it later. The cauteries on the horns should be finer than those used for the middle of the head, and here is their form:
dou cautere dou chief	"Of the cautery of the head,"
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in one part of the head and the illness spreads as far as the eye, and the flesh has been purged with medicines that cleanse it, and all the other treatments I have mentioned in the division of illnesses have been performed but they do not help at all: then cauteries are applied according to two methods, namely those made of medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with hot medicine is performed as follows: take a handful of dried basil leaves, remove their outer skin and crush them into powder; then make an incision in the temple where the pain is felt so that you can place the handful of basil leaves beneath the skin. Then bind it tightly and leave it like that for twelve hours. After that, untie it and remove the basil leaves and let the wound remain open for two or three days. Then apply cotton soaked in butter over it until it closes up.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound has healed with ointment, if you wish to apply any burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on treating burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery follows this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery with which is the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	It is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a closed lock with a slight curve and a small indentation in the middle. Place it on the painful area and turn the fire gently until half of the point of the cautery has been burned; then lift your hand so that only the artery, which is located outside, is burned, and allow an abundant flow of blood to come forth.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, apply cotton soaked in water of salt on the wound for three days. Then apply cotton soaked in butter over it and treat the wound with ointment until it heals completely. If you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cutellare," which is pointed at both ends, be careful not to cut the artery that runs through this migraine if it is not an ancient one.
de emigraine	de migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	If you are treating migraine as we have previously discussed in the section on diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries made of medicine and iron do not help, then you must heat the cautery called "cutellare" until it turns white. Then quickly place it on the painful area and trace a line about half an inch long with it, making sure not to cut the artery or go all the way down to the bone. Be careful not to harm the jawbone which moves when chewing, and make sure that the patient does not move their neck so as not to cause spasm or fright. If there is heavy bleeding from the artery after cutting it, do not panic, especially if you are not familiar with this procedure or have not practiced it before. Leave the wound open for now, but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery has been cut and show you where it can be found in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you find that these cauteries do not help with the illness and the patient is suffering, then cauterize them on the head as we have described earlier, and treat the wound until it heals completely. If you wish to use a cautery that has been mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery, then use one with two blades; this cautery is better than the previous one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Chapter 49: On the Pain of the Ears Due to Coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When cold pain comes to the ear and one has opened medicinal solutions there and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, but the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery called "point":
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the cautery all around the affected ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and then move it a little away from the root of the ear since you have marked the spot; and use ten points on each ear; afterwards clean the spot until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the Torture of the Mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated by cautery is only that which moves with phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not perform cauterization on those that come from sore and sores.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you are treating this type of torture that moves with phlegm from dryness and purging of the head and gargling, and these remedies do not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little way outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery mark on top of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger's width; and leave the cautery there until half of the kernel is burned; this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the form of the cautery that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary for the knife to be slightly larger; afterwards clean the spot as I said earlier until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the spot that is called "vessels" as we have mentioned earlier, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and cure it as we have said before.
de litargie	de la litargie
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large ointments and pills made from mignonette to cleanse the brain. Afterwards, shave the head of the patient entirely, and place on the occiput the plaster of mustard that is written about in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: perform it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed in this way, good; and if not, perform three cauteries in the middle of the head going down to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each cautery; and cure it as the others, and if you see it join together, and the patient is suffering, then perform one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, perform two more on the two horns, and cure it until it is healed; and these cauteries are called "olivary," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	Pour traire la froideur du chef, il covient mettre li malaides en un lit bien chauffez et bien couverts, et doner lui un bains d’herbes chaudes, c’est à dire verveine et sauge et chouli ou chous vert; aprés doner lui yeres de graisse doree sur le chief, puis li met sus la teste ung emplaustre de canelle et de girofle en poudre mis en un lit dou pain; puis li fai .iij. cauteres emmi le chief comme j’ai dit devant.
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The chief must be cleansed of hairs and of that which we have said before. After this, raise the patient's head, then apply cauteries within the chief and upon each horn, and one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring, and the disease is severe, apply four cauteries upon the spine of the back. Leave them until the best of the heart is burned, then lift your hand; afterward care until it is healed, and let the cautery which is called 'olivare' be that which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not apply cauteries except for the phlegmatic type. First, cleanse the brain of hairs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and capable of taking medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure this, perform gargarism and mastication to cleanse the brain often with good foods. After that, raise the child's head in the middle, and apply one cautery according to what we have said before, and one cautery upon the vessel, and upon each horn; and if the patient is severe and enduring, apply cauteries as I have said for those who have paralysis and weakness of body, upon the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, apply one subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is the presence of superfluities or corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then apply cauteries as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is that superfluities tend towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raising the head of the patient, take one well-made linen cloth, like a circle, and place it on the head. The patient should sit crossed-legged and be held securely on all sides. Then present the linen and pour melted sheep's butter onto it. Heat the butter gradually over a fire so that the dough can withstand it. Afterward, empty the circle inside the head and let it cool. Do this once each week with other good treatments until the patient is cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you wish to cauterize a wound by making several pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the brain greatly; then place on it cotton moistened in butter and grease of swan.
de l’awe des eulz	For the treatment of eye pain
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When pain first comes to the eyes due to the signs that I have mentioned in the division, begin by giving the patient something to drink that cleanses the head and guards against all moistures. Make him sweat or take baths several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After him, he commands to raise his head, and makes a cautery on the head, and makes two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the water is at the two eyes together, or one if the descent is at one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the heart with every cautery, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision of cauterization, how you will perform it; and never do cautery or burn beneath the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	of the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins or near the arteries that appear on the forehead outside; and one sees that it is cold, superfluous fluid, then he makes the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the descending aqueous humor to the eyes: one cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or burns beneath the two bones behind; and if there is a need for more, he cauterizes skillfully above the eyebrow with small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	When the aqueous humor descends inside the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not improve, then give the sick person three cooked chickens to drink after; then raise his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the cautery olive; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the eyebrow ridges; and beware of cutting the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	with which is the form
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see fit to make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand there until a third of the paper (sclera) is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Regarding the hair that points at the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes turn towards the partedens and prick the eye, and cauteries are made in two ways for this: either by fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or the fire cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their origin, he should restrain his eyes so that they do not move until they have grown.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then the patient should lay on his back; after that, he should draw a figure on the paper of the eyes like a mirror's surface, with its beginning near the hairs; then place cotton soaked in egg white and groundsel on the eye, and afterwards heat the cautery which has this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing gently several times on the figure you have drawn, so that the skin is burnt at that spot; and the sign of the work's healthiness is when you see the paper recede and the hairs rise to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days; afterwards place cotton soaked in butter until the burn has healed; finally treat with ointment until it is completely healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come back and the paper is softened, then begin again with the cautery on that same spot as you did first; and if the hairs are defective, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural level, becomes even, and does not prick the eye anymore.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning medicinal cautery is performed by commanding the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment shape like the leaf of a myrtle. Next, take three each of frankincense and white wax, grind them together well, and make it quickly so that it does not cool; then spread it on the shape you have made like the myrtle leaf, place it on the paper of the eyes; if the patient has only one eye affected, work on one, and if both are affected, do both as well. Place cotton soaked in egg white underneath the eye, and let the patient lie on their back with their two hands pointing towards the medicine, pressing gently each time the patient feels the sensation of the medicine, for it burns like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	After you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the biting sensation has passed, then lift the awl and see if you can raise the paper as if it were raised by pressure of fire or by incision; and if so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply more medicine to the wound where the medicine has not taken effect until your work is even and your eyes are sharp; then place cotton moistened in butter until the burning of the heart has ceased, afterwards dress the wound with ointment called "diaphoresis" and others until it is clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to take great care with your work, so that no error occurs in administering medicine to the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes damp afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on that spot softened by the damp paper, just as you did before; afterwards, treat until it is healed; and this is the form of the cautery for the eyes.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of people are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this adjust your cautery; and do not stray from the right path that one who learns this art should follow.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Regarding the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you perform a cautery on it in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to place their head in your hand; and hold the patient's head between your hands so that they do not move or turn their head. After that, place cotton soaked in egg white or in persimmon juice on the eye. Then heat the cautery which is shaped like this: it is pointed at the top like a dovecot roof tile, with the point being the cautery itself; if you see, then it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, then it should also be like a tent; but in any case, this shape is most useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After that, press the fistula if it is open and remove the pus from it and dry it. And if it is closed, then open it and draw out fluid from it. After that place the hot cautery on it and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the eye closest to the nose so that your hand does not tremble. Then insert the cautery into the fat of the eye and burn it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you reach the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	But if not, then recommence the cautery once more, and again if necessary, leaving it for three days; afterwards put damp cotton in butter, and continue the treatment with drying ointment until it is healed; and if after forty days it is not healed, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow what comes next in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is one manner of fistulous cautery which some of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand a fistula, and split open its location; afterward place in the slit a subtle camphor balm, of which this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make it the size of a grain of pepper. Then hold your hand on the clove firmly and do not let the patient move their nose so that the melted wax does not run into their eye. And it is necessary to place cotton soaked in egg whites or in water on the patient's eye. The wax will then seal the fistula, and will heal it with wonderful speed.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have spoken of, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then you must administer a puncture to the nose and return the fistula to its proper place within the nose.
des crevaices en levres	Regarding cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks appear on the lips which are called "cracks," and especially on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place him immediately in those crevices until it reaches the source; afterwards, cleanse the wound with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the boil of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess appears at the root of the throat or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it produces putrefaction and becomes swollen and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the sections, but it does not improve: then it is necessary for you to apply one cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, close or pierce the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the source of it on the inside; and do this once or twice, after that treat it as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover the wound and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	on toothache
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it is not effective, then place the head of the sick person on your lap; afterwards heat the cautery whose shape will come later in this manner, so that you place a pipe over the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside, and hold your hand until the sick person feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; after that, remove your hand and begin the cautery again according to your desire; afterwards, have the sick person fill their mouth with salted water, and keep it there for an hour and then spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was loose is made firm again, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	on toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from coldness, where there is coldness or truth, and the remedies of medicine do not suffice, then there is need for a cautery in two ways: cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	The cautery of butter is such that you take butter from cow's milk and put it on the tip of an iron or brass spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a thread, and moisten it in boiling butter, and quickly place it on the painful tooth until it cools down; and do this often so that its effectiveness reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see that the wool and cotton are moistened with cold butter, put them on the aching tooth, and put a red-hot iron over it until the fire reaches the neck of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery of fire together is such that you take an iron or bronze rod, and it should be so thick that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient. Afterward heat the cautery, of which the form will come below, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed on that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in the midst of this cautery, and then quickly wipe it away; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	Make a cautery of whatever size you wish, depending on your skill level; here is the shape of the cautery
des scrophules	"of scrofulas"
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are caused by phlegm and cold moistures, and do not respond to digestion through medicines, then heat the hair cautery described below, which has two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery. Place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice until it reaches the depth of the abscess; if the abscess is small, use the cautery according to its size and leave it there for three days. Then apply moistened cotton with butter until the burn is healed. After that, treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is healthy again.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cautery:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moistures prevail upon the channels of the lung, especially when it is due to a cold constitution, then the patient should first be voided by solvent medicines. Afterwards, apply the cautery at the root of the throat, but make sure not to come too close to the throat itself, and do not burn the heart but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterward, apply the other cautery to the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and let it be the cautery called "clavile," of which we have the form beforehand; and heal the place as we have said before until it is clean.
de la toust	de la toux
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When coughing and lung disease are caused by cold moist humors, and the patient does not have fever or shortness of breath, and the condition is chronic, perform two cauteries on the skin over the lungs. Then perform another cautery between the breasts, near the nipples, using a cautery called "clavile" according to the shape described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, apply cautery by pricking with all the cauteries called "poins," of which the form is given here beforehand in the disease of the ears; and let there be thirty or more points around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterward, heal the place according to what is said before, and let there be three rains of cautery according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are easier to perform, you should make three incisions at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	de la dislocation de l'épaule
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the arm bone is dislocated due to moist humors and is repositioned but keeps slipping back and becomes dislocated again even with slight movements, as we have experienced, it is necessary to first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, have the patient lie on their back and side. Then lift the chest with the palms of your hands. If the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has two points as shown here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	"and cauterize the lung until it pierces to the side, and there would be four cauteries from the cautery figure; and therefore it is done with the cautery that has three nerves, for which reason the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the thinness of a thread, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:"
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	"And sometimes it is attached above this one nerve, for which there are eight cauteries."
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	"Then put on the cautery quickly broken with a thread; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well comforted."
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, which happens rarely, then apply cautery on the thickness of the cautery clavile, or many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For once the joint is closed, and moisture removed, the patient is healed
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach causing it to lose its temperament, and there is an increase in phlegm that does not benefit from usual treatments, then the patient must be turned onto their back, extend their legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	**For this, afterwards make three cauteries on the underside of the elbow of the arm with the quantity of two fingers each. For every cautery make a clove-like incision, and two cauteries outside the two ribs so that the shape of the cauteries forms three angles and has such space between them that they are not joined together when they fester; and let the cauteries be so deep that they reach both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without altering it.**
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	**And if you see that it is necessary to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form, and whoever fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and pressing on the stomach one point according to the quantity that you judge; then cauterize with all the cautery which is called "point".**
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	**After the treatment of the cure that we had before, until it is healthy.**
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When it comes to liver pain caused by coldness, moisture, and excessive windiness, such that its natural complexion is altered by excesses; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, but does not improve, then the patient should be made to lie on their right side. And make three cauteries according to this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondria, where the ribcage meets. Leave the thickness of two fingers between each cautery; let the cauteries be as long as your forearm, but do not press too hard with your hand throughout the cautery; burn only halfway down to the heart, and have the patient stand upright on their feet; if they cannot stand, then they should lie face up, extend their legs, and raise their arms. This is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if it is your desire, then cauterize these cauteries with a knife if you are skilled and wise in the art, but beware that you do not burn all of the heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and let it not come near to the belly, for the heart is very subtle there, and especially so on the right side.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When he has an abscess in the liver,
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this remedy fails the physicians, it is necessary that the patient be seated on his head; and then seize with a hot iron the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a brand, of which here is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the flesh is burned, and bring it up to the skin, so that all the pores are closed; afterwards treat according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed; and it is not necessary for anyone but he who has long studied the art of medicine to use this cautery, by whom many such illnesses have been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can boldly work, although it seems better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	"of the cautery for pleurisy"
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	"The ancients said that one should make for pleurisy cauteries with roots of aristologus, and in this manner: take a root of aristologus long, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and also thick and as long as your two fingers; and moisten it in oil, and put it on the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the armpit and the neck, and two small cauteries a little descending in the part that is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclined backwards a little; and one cautery amidst the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the two sides of the breast before the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do openly just as in smelling."
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	Some ancients said that some men used to heat up and place between the ribs a cautery resembling a razor, until it reaches the abscess; and without causing pain, as we have said regarding the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	"of the mouse"
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the sections on treatments and it does not improve, then there are three methods of cauterization that are all beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	There are two methods for this. First, make three or four cauteries, lined up according to the length of the spine, following the shape of the liver cautery we described earlier; do not rush your hand through the entire cautery, and keep the patient lying on their back. The second method is to heat the cautery that has two points, as shown in the shoulder dislocation; lift the chest that is near the spine, where the rib cage comes towards the left side; the elevators used to lift the chest should be according to the length of the body, and the cauteries should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Afterwards, insert the two inflamed points until the chest is pierced from the other side; then pull out the cautery, and there will be four in total. And if you wish, cauterize with three points.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment has cast off corruption after a long time, it is better than the other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	Regarding dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not useful for hydropics except in the manner called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in sections, and your treatment does not help, then you must perform four cauteries around the belly button, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the navel, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and the cauteries should be close to the spine of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	"Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time to cast out putrefaction, and do not neglect the treatment of the patient afterwards; and healing will hasten, and both intentions will be together with the help of God."
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	"The form of the cautery for the belly should be like the one we have shown before, which is a key-shaped; and those for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been put forth beforehand."
de l’enfleure des piez	"of the swelling of the feet"
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in someone who is hydropics and filled with yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; and raise your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go in too deep, otherwise you might spill out the yellow water, and the cautery should be made according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	"Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the shinbone; and let the cauteries be long, one in front of the knee and the other behind it, in the middle of the leg. Leave the cauteries open for a long time without treating them, until the water comes out. After that, treat with the other methods that we have mentioned."
de la menoison	"of pleurisy"
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	"When pleurisy comes from coldness and moisture to such an extent that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great strength, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken about before regarding the cautery of the stomach, at the circular cautery. And make four small cauteries around the navel, each the size of a small key-shaped cautery, and two cauteries on the hips."
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	"And if you see that there are abundant moistures and the patient is suffering greatly, then make a cautery on the point of the chest, one cautery on each armpit, and two small cauteries near the large one on the stomach, for the treatment is profitable when there is good help."
de la cure des emorroydes	"of the treatment of hemorrhoids"
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are at the fundament, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupt humors, and they have been treated as we have said in sections, but it is not beneficial, then apply cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is directly below the shoulder blade, placed evenly and triangularly; and two beneath the buttocks; and if you think that his stomach is cooled down, and the flesh does not cook, and you see swelling in the face, then place one large cautery on the stomach as it was mentioned earlier, and another on the liver, and another on the flank at the level of the cautery knife; and leave the cautery on for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, heal until it is whole again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of the fleshy tissue called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you remove the fleshy tissue called "thelul", if it is inflamed use a cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it completely burning on that removed piece of flesh; leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the root of the vein, from which blood comes forth. Do this once or twice, and if there is much fleshy tissue, cauterize each one as we have described; afterwards profit from the care of ointments until they are healed. And if you cauterize with a large cautery on fleshy flesh, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure being cut or opened, which we will describe in its proper place, then comes such an illness that it can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If a fistula occurs and it is inflamed and poured out with rottenness and corrupted moistures, then probe it gently all the way through, ensuring that you know its full depth.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to how much the tent entered there, and continue with the cautery until those putrid and corrupted bodies are burned once, or twice or thrice, according to the quantity needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves that lie within, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, beware of these areas, and only perform this procedure in a fat location, thinking that it is not persistent; afterward, treat the area until it is clean, and if the area is sound, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the area is entirely healthy; and if the matter has not been removed, know that the area is infected, and the bone at the front is corrupted.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the loins, and there is great windiness, and no menstrual flow,
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and flaccid due to coldness and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make cauteries on the part below the bladder, where the hair of the pubis begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, each cautery being about the length of a hazelnut; and make one cautery behind the back, or two if necessary; and let the cauteries be nail-shaped according to the form mentioned above.
de la marris	Of the womb
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, preventing conception, and the menstruation is corrupted with delayed onsets accompanied by great pain upon arrival, then make three cauteries around the vulva as previously mentioned for bladder cauteries, and two cauteries behind the back; let the cauteries be nail-shaped as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the beard
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moistures descend to the beard's bag, causing it to become displaced from its usual position, with the sign being that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together, and the place of separation is found empty; then cauterize the patient above the beard's bag with a circular cautery, encircling the bag around its base before cutting into it, so that the bag is within the circle; let the cautery be like those used for stomach cauteries.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, then make three large olive-shaped cauteries around the base of the beard's bag, with each cautery being as deep as all the others; let the cautery be clean.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain in the beard[TOOL_CALLS]Quant tu sentirás grant dolor en la boiste de ta hainche, si prent une plume de penne de galline et la met sus la boiste de ta hainche, et le meins que tu puedras souffrir; et quant tu auras ainsi soffert tant qu’il te puisse plaire, tu laisseras cheoir hors de ta boiste de hainche une gotte de ton sang. Adonques covient que tu fache .ij. cauteres environ la boiste de la hainche, si com nous avons dit ou cautere de la vessie.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the hip bone,
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After applying the cautery, there are two methods of cautery: namely, burning medicines together, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is of many kinds, one of which is as follows: you should cauterize the breastbone of the neck with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and they should have good depth and breadth, with a space between each cautery equal to the size of two fingers, and the cauteries should be olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on top of the head of the neck, so there are four according to this shape.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, then cauterize upon the cautery of the circle which we have spoken about beforehand in the dislocation of the haunch; but do it in such a manner that the circle contains all of the haunch, and all the thickness of the bone is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when pain holds in the neck and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient feels pain, and one cautery above the ankle on the left side a little; let the cauteries be cutellar-shaped, and burn the thickness of a knife blade; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers from the foot or near there, cauterize where they feel pain with three or four points at the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, then one does more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then one makes a cutellar or circular cautery there, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave too much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who performed cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the leg became entirely swollen, and also the foot, and it was pierced and rotted all over.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a bellyache from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, make cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men say in cauterizing the groin, of which this is the manner: make such an iron as thick at the head as a large hazelnut or somewhat less, and let it be perforated and let the perforations extend from one end to the other, each space being like the thickness of a nut; and let the perforations be on both sides, and also resemble nuts, and let there be many such irons well-made; and this is its form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red-hot and glowing hot, and then place it on the sick haunch bone, and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery, and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; afterward cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regret, and few who use it. Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries, which can be endured where it affects.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of burning medicine are such that you make an instrument with perforations into which the edge of the door descends, and it is made of brass or iron on one side long, and at the top there are two nuts, each being the thickness of a nut apart; and they are open in front and above, and join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After place the box of the head on the patient lying on his side, and press your hand firmly on the box of the head; then throw between the two circles of the hot water that has been heated over the fire one handful, and let it sit for an hour in time, and suffer the patient to endure the heat and burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there will be found biting like fire, and when the biting has passed, then lift your hand with the instrument and raise the head of warm water gently, and let it lie thus for three days, and put on butter until that which is black from the scalding is removed; and let it lie for three more days so that corruption may be drawn out from it; and this would be the final aid after the treatment with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread as far as the thigh or as far as the leg, then make one instrument that you apply water according to what you have done on the head gradually; and this is the manner of hot water, which I have written about in my treatise on medicinal correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicklime and live coal, as much of one as of the other, grind them together, and place them in nine pots.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	In which there is a small hole made such that the point of a razor can enter; and place another well-sealed pot on top of it, and add quicklime and live coal and sweet water on top, until there are two handfuls above the powders as you will have taken them up well in your hand; and let it be thus until clear water and steam come out into the leaden pot, then take all that water and throw it onto the coals and onto the quicklime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very hot and suitable for many medical works and cauteries of other limbs For it has the same effect as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hair well, such as henbane and honey of almonds and coal with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galen tells us of a treatment whereby a man was cured of sciatic nerve and hip pain, greatly praised it, saying no other treatment was performed, and that he was healed immediately upon doing this, and afterwards bathed as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	He said that one should take green and dry litharge, grind it well with a drop of fat, place it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain resides, leave it there for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter a bath until his body is slightly warm, and lay him in bed, and the pain will all depart and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a cautery with such medicine unless it is after an evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with goat bile, it helps greatly; and the cauteries should be performed in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen, soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow between the thumb of the foot and the one called "foscile".
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dry goat dung and burn it until it becomes charcoal. Place it on the linen, and leave it there until it is extinguished. Repeat this process again, continuing until you believe by sensation that the heat reaches the bone, and the pain has ceased. This type of cautery is called "cautère de chèvre".
de la dolor dou dos	for the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from percussion or from too great an evacuation or from similar symptoms of spread-out cold matter, none of these symptoms warrant cauteries except that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after the patient has been voided of fetid pills or other such things, that one make upon his back where the pain holds three lines signed with a compass, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery which is called "points"; and if you see fit, make three cauteries or four at the middle clavicle bone according to this shape:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the sign of its beginning is that they have narrow urine when they rise up, and fear; and you find on the back spine and in our appearance which comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you wish to cure it, then cauterize with the cautery of the navel according to this shape:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that each part of the spine receives the cautery evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish to do so, cauterize around the spine with points two or three lines apart, keeping them close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Then heal the wound until it is clean according to what we have said, and be sure not to apply cautery to any gibbosity near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	for the pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints comes from moistures that are spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes to the feet, which doctors properly call "podagry," and when it is of cold cause and cannot be cured by medications, then it is treated with cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the ankle joint, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this shape.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need for you to press on the face of the foot, perform cauterization at that location called 'point'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if pains extend to the knees and other joints, which happens often, perform cauterization on each knee with 3 or 4 cauteries of each side, using olive oil for each cautery; and if you need more, then do so, but do not exceed your hand's reach so that the burning reaches only as far as the tip of the heart.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if pains are in the hands, make two incisions around the wrist; and if pain remains on the fingers, make incisions on each joint and along the hairs of the hand; and if pains extend to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and have the patient follow a good regimen and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	Because if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he shall be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the nose
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When an inflammation of the spleen comes on suddenly, and the bowels descend to the groin, and it is newly come upon, then it is necessary that when you see him to cure, that he not eat that day; and that he use things that leave the belly, so that the wind may descend from his belly. Afterward, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to stretch out his arm as much as the bowels are repaired, and hold the sinew in your two hands, and press down hard beneath the spleen on the bone of the elbow, and there make a sign like half a circle above the body. Then heat the cautery which has this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it becomes white and casts seeds
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bowels to their place; and let the minister hold his hand over them so they do not move backwards; and open the patient's thighs well, and put a cushion under him and one servant on each thigh, and another on his chest holding his hands; then apply the cautery on the sign all along your hand, reaching the bone with your right hand, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bowel does not spill out while applying the cautery; so as not to burn it; and so that the patient neither dies nor suffers any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that cauteries for children are fine according to their size, and likewise large ones for adults according to theirs; afterwards on the third day treat the place with butter until the heat is gone; then treat with other ointments until it is clean; and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his bindings be left loose so that his eyes do not protrude when he rises to go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, let him be given a well-made sling for forty more days; and let him have good rest, for he should work little and guard against excessive drinking and eating, and against laughing too loudly; and when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall tell afterward the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	"Of the rupture of the abdomen"
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When fistulas come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, make the cautery of the cautery round according to its quantity, and burn the third of the heart; afterward treat according to what we have said; and some of the ancients say that it should be cauterized at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the entrance point and draw a line along the width above the rupture, and another below it, and hold your hand within throughout the fire cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	"Of old pain in some limb"
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, either from falling or striking, and this pain persists for a long time, despite medical treatments being ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cautery should be done according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, its strength and virtue, and its location regarding twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is freed from the first cautery, that is good; but if not, repeat another cautery on top of it, for it is customary that it should move to the limb nearby, therefore you must perform the cauteries until the patient is cured.
de meselerie	Of dislocations
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Wounds are often greatly helped by cautery with great benefit, especially those that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When cauterizing the sight, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not recede nor remain, and you doubt that corruption may seize the whole patient, then make five cauteries on the head: one between the head and the nose, another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape; let your hand lie there until the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scorches come out so that the vapors of the thick humors may issue forth; and cauterize it on the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the dislocation is widespread and clearly apparent, it is necessary to perform cauteries as described above on top of the head, one near the nose, two on either side of the neck spine, five on the back spine, one large one on the stomach and another nearby, two on each shoulder blade, two on the ribs, two on the inner arms, one on each wrist joint and hand pit, and also cauterize behind the feet. Be careful not to burn any nerves located at the back of the legs, and perform one cautery on the ulna bone and another on the stomach bone, and one more on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more cauteries you make, the more you do good, and the greater the benefit. And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as the healthy person does, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries are large and small according to the limbs and joints as you will find them in the methods of iron tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After applying flour of wheat with honey, and other treatments until it is clean.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices but is not yet healed, then apply cauteries to the limb according to its size and thickness; let the cautery be a little penetrating into the flesh near the heart. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is performed on the hand, foot, and back at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb. And thus if the swelling has been removed; nonetheless let no one meddle with it unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	of white spots
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed and medical treatments are ineffective, then cauterize it with a slightly deep cautery according to the thickness of the flesh. Continue until the white spot is removed and its color returns to normal. Then treat it with buckwheat flour and lentil flour mixed with rose oil, plantain leaves, pigeon blood, and swallow's blood (equal parts each). Mix everything together, tie it in a cloth, and apply it to the site until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre begins and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And indeed the wise say that one should also apply a fire cautery to the middle of the tumor; and indeed this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen before; and it is more appropriate that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circular," as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it lingers due to the excess that it produces or because of the weakness of the patient when they are elderly (that is, too old), and there is little blood, or because of the time; and you see that it needs to be hastened in its course: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries, prickingly; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten its death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced all through the cautery, then heat the cautery which is shaped like this:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of that illness called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the heart, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them so deeply that the course of the corruption is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After its treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another condition called "corrodens" exists, which is nothing but a rotting of limb, for it consumes limbs as fire does dry logs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate fire cautery together with heat, then heat the caustic irons small and large according to what is needed for the affected area; afterwards cauterize it on all sides until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything which is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it rest for three days, and apply a poultice with oil on the cauterized places until the burns of the fire are gone, and all corruption is removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After treatment with ointments producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see that healthy flesh does not grow, then it is good; but if not, then recommence the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And sometimes this ailment has been treated with hot medicine instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless, fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already mentioned the treatment of the hot medicine in the section on divisions: take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the moles that come upon the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often, a disease called "clos" in our language arises at the feet, and it is a large broken thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is performed by heating the cautery iron like a vaulting pin, made of good iron to fit around the nail on all sides with subtle edges. Place it hot onto the nail and turn your hand completely around the nail until you reach the head of the nail; leave it there for three days until it begins to produce pus. Then apply a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, leaving it overnight, and the nail will fall out and its roots will be loosened.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the joint with ointment made from flesh until it is clean.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are turned away from the body, and this happens many times in hands and feet, then you must bring cautery of hot water to it. And it is done in this way: take a tube of brass or iron, or a feather from a goose, and put it on the nail and its root; that is to say for warts. And place the tube around so that it encompasses everything entirely, then pour a little hot water inside, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the tube comes to the root of the nail, and can find a deep path for the hot water to reach the root; and let the patient endure a little the biting of the hot water for an hour. Then leave it thus, and it will be rooted out entirely along with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus one does after another, until you remove all those on the body, then treat them with oils that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	"the treatment for trembling"
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	"If some [person] trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other [fever], then you must make for them four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cautery; then the trembling will cease, and the health will hasten the cold sickness."
des pustules puans	"putrid pustules"
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never do sores appear on the body's surface or pus-filled pimples, which come from corrupted thick matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	As soon as they appear, one must first make a cautery on each head of the pimple: either a fine pinewood cautery, whose tip has been heated in fire, or a long root of bistort, or a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never do they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further from then on, but the excess from which they come is drained away, and they are healed; but this should be done after bloodletting.
quant li artere est copee	"When the artery is severed"
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surroundings, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to smell.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And moreover, when this happens to anyone, you should quickly put your two index fingers on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is calmed under your fingers, and no more drops come out; then heat some small and large olive cauteries in the fire until they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is spent, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the bleeding has stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the sick person. And know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be easily stopped unless by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by strongly tying a thread, or by medicines put on that have the power to stop bleeding; and let it be tied and bound properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	And those who bring about stopping of bleeding by tying very tightly with cloths or putting hot things on top, or other similar things, do little good if any at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and there is no doctor or medicine present, then one should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press very hard until it stops above the wound and the vein; and do not move your finger, but moisten it with cold water often, making it as cold as possible until the blood is frozen and solidified and stopped. And then do what is necessary with cauteries and medicines afterward.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the surgeries for slashing wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	In the first chapter, we have told you about all diseases in which fire cautery or burning medicine is necessary, and their causes, instruments, and forms. And I have put that chapter from head to foot, so that one can find more easily what one wants in this chapter by following the same path.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And before I begin this chapter, dear friend, you should know that there is more danger and fear in this chapter on cauteries than in the first one, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the practice of this chapter there is often much loss of blood when opening veins, making incisions on tumors, treating wounds, extracting splinters, and making incisions on stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die as a result.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt anything foolish.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come seeking treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If such people are stricken with their illness and die easily due to the severity of their disease and its intensity; one should fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who regain their senses and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	Do not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place greater importance on your honor than on your greed. Do not recklessly open those whose cure is certain and for whom you can gain fame and praise; use prognosis and indication in treating your patients to ensure their salvation. This will help you achieve good reputation, glory, and praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	"Dear child, Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if it pleases Him to inspire you with His holy breath, Amen."
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	"Or I have arranged this chapter for you by chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries which I have already arranged from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need."
dou chief plein d’aigue	"A full head of water"
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	"Know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the head of the child is too tightly constricted; but sometimes it happens from a hidden cause that one does not know."
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	"And I have never seen this disease outside of children, and in all those whom I have seen it occurred suddenly; therefore it seems to me that it is not fitting for me to leave out the treatment of such cases."
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	"And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled every day so that he could not support it; and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture gathered under the bone above the syphac, between the heart and the bone. And if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make a wide opening in the head, as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows out." Here is the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	"If the moisture has grown more and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:"
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	"And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the signs that the angles of the head are raised on each side, and water spurts out when you press it with your hand inside, but this has not been revealed to you: then you must make three incisions in the head according to this manner:"
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	After the incision, remove all moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After applying bandages and powders, apply vinegar and oil to the wound and let it sit for five days. Then remove the dressing, dress the wound with compresses and ointments, elevate the limb, and feed the patient dry food without moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	"And another manner of incision is to look where the aperture of the swelling appears, and where the gathering of water is; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left."
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	"Therefore cut there where the swelling appears and the gathering of water is, and make the incision according to what you have the power to do. And take care not to cut into the artery; otherwise a great vein of blood will flow out, so that the sick person dies from bleeding and evacuation of moisture."
de reume	"of boils"
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a person contracts an illness called "cataract" in the eyes or the foot, and if that illness is chronic, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is cauterization with two arteries being tied off.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	When you cover the eyes, the patient should turn their head backwards; afterwards, rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient hold their neck with the entire cloth; next, look where the vein lies, and mark the spots on both sides near the ears, which are usually folded back; then make incisions with an instrument sharp on both sides, cutting deeply until reaching the bone.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see one artery, insert the spatula underneath it and cut it from above at two points across its width.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	Once the vein is cut, blood will flow out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the arteries do not appear when touched, you must measure the space between them with three fingers, then make incisions until reaching the bone; and the amount of blood that should be let out is six ounces, but sometimes a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure and the fullness of the artery. Then examine the wound: if there remains a point on the bone, cut it off so that no inflammation comes, then press the wound shut and bandage it, applying salves until it is healed.
de emigrainne	"de emigrainne" translates to "of migraine".
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an ancient migraine comes on, accompanied by catarrh and severe headache with moist eyes, heat in the temples, and other such disturbances which do not improve with medical treatment, then it is necessary to tie off the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of tying off these arteries is for the patient to shave their temples and find the artery that can be felt pulsing in the temple. If it is not visible, the patient should tie a cloth around their head, then rub the area with a rough cloth until the artery becomes visible. Then apply warm water to the area until the artery appears clearly. Next, take the spatula which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then carefully scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then grasp it with forceps and pull it upwards, cutting away all the surrounding tissues on each side; if the artery is thin, prick it with a needle point, then cut that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it is not cut, the blood will not flow entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And let out six ounces of blood, up to three. If the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong silk thread to prevent infection before the wound heals and ensure continuous bleeding. Then cut off any excess tissue between the two ties immediately afterward. Afterward, if necessary, cauterize the cut with a hot iron down to the bone level so that the flesh is sealed completely; this should be done only if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery helps to stop bleeding: therefore it is more helpful for stopping moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	When performing the tying off of arteries, it is important to fill the area with cotton and place well-made bandages on top. After removing the bandages, apply dry medications that promote tissue growth and more bandages until healed. If bleeding occurs from the artery while working, quickly cauterize with a hot iron or use vitriol and press your hand over it until the bleeding stops. Alternatively, press your thumb onto the area to freeze the blood, then rinse with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and tie off as necessary. A simpler method is to use a cautery that cuts in two places but has wide edges to retain heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it retains its heat less well.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be one thumb's width of space between the two knives, then when you have marked the two places to cut with hot iron, hold it against the skin until it reaches the bone. Cut through the flesh at both marks, but keep them a finger's width apart because the cautery does not seal completely along its entire length; here is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears from the eyes flow down into the channels above the brow of the head, and no medication applied brings relief, and you observe the patient's face becoming redder with heat and tension felt in their forehead like tremors; if these tears are thin and moist so that the hair around the eyes falls out and the skin becomes hot and raw from the flow of tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called this old remedy "a bruise cure," and here's what you should do for the patient who has this condition: first have them grow hair on their forehead, then make three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead; one incision should be about two finger-widths down the middle of the forehead towards the nose, and the other two should be placed above the temples, avoiding the arteries located there. Keep your hand away from the lower jaw, and each cut should be about three fingers wide when measured across. Have a piece of sponge and plenty of bandages ready to wipe away blood, then insert the spatumile (a type of spoon) into the wound as shown below:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Into the incision that runs from the temple to the second incision, and scrape away all the fat between the two cuts down to the bone of the face. Then remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then insert into the first incision the instrument called "the curette", which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other. Here is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp knife towards the flesh near the heart, and the blunt knife towards the bone, and cut until it reaches the middle groove.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels descending from the head to the eyes as far as the incision reaches those that open near the heart, and then do likewise in the middle groove until it reaches the other side; and then extract blood evenly, and squeeze the area for collected blood; then place in each groove a bandage of old cotton, and put on wet rags in wine and oil and rosemary, and ensure no abscesses form; and on the third day untie the ligature, and bring abundant watercress, then treat with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments as one treats wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	"of the eyes"
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	"When catarrh comes on repeatedly, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weaken the sight, and the membranes burned; and the hair falls out, and deep in the head there is feverish pain, and the sick sneezes; then know by these signs that those matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the remedy for what is inside is as follows."
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should command the patient to lie down on their back, then make a long incision along the forehead and another across it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin at the fissure of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be unto the bone; and keep thy hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at eating; and when the bone is uncovered, then suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then open between the two lips of the wound and put therein old cotton and linen bandages; then bind thereover cloths moistened in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when they are removed, then thou must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then cure it with drying agents, which cause flesh to adhere.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	"In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flour and 4 parts of colophony, and make an ointment; and administer it to these wounds to cause flesh to grow throughout."
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of earplugs
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	"All that falls into the ears is one of four things: seeds, an animal, a stone or something similar like iron; grains such as peas, beans, chickpeas; or flowing substances like water and mucus and similar things."
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When something like a stone or other thing falls into the ear which does not fit well nor grow in the ear, place the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If thou seest the stone, then distill some drops of violet oil or sesame oil thereupon, then bring about extraction; and when it is done, cause him to sneeze with condiment, and stop his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and stretch the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times fire comes from this treatment; and if it does not come from fire, one should perform extraction with delicate forceps, about which see below:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	"If it jumps out with the forceps, that is good; if not, then administer extraction with a delicate hook of small size; and if it does not jump out through this, then make a tube of lead and put the end of the tube into the hole of the ear very strongly, and stop up what is around the tube with soft wax so that wind cannot enter with the tube; then try to extract it forcefully, for many times it comes out in this way as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, then take glue which birds use, and put some on an instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever thing it may be, and try to extract it."
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if it does not come out with all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear before hot pus and spasm come, and the manner of cutting is this: first make the sick person drink cephalic water and remove blood according to their strength, then make the sick person sit between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small cut in the root of the ear at the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be like a crescent moon so that you can reach the stone, then extract it according to your power, and suck it out quickly into your mouth; and continue treating until they are healed."
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	"And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer 1 thin, delicate spoon according to this shape:"
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that boil.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the boil is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many incisions; then extract it with delicate forceps and sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is clean.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, in the water that falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing movements first, and plug the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out from there, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it does not [jump out], then take many probes according to the length of your thin finger and light ones, heat them a little in the fire. And let the patient insert one into his ear hole, and push it out on the other side; strike another probe on top of the one that is in the ear; do not cease this striking until all the water has come out, then take some reeds and put one end into the ear and heat the other end with fire until the end of the reed is burnt. Then repeat this process with other reeds until all the water comes out as we have said with the probes.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	"In the extraction of an animal, if it is small in body, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large in body so that it can be felt, then administer extraction with forceps; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear."
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	"In the extraction of earthworms that enter the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in treating distillations, and the cure does not help at all, then it behooves you to look at the ear toward the sun: if no worms appear, then extract them with delicate forceps; and if none are seen, then take the tube of which this is the shape:"
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And place the finest head in the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suck strongly on the entire vein; do this often until all the worms emerge.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey coming out, then stopper around the vein with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out forcefully as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in expelling worms, which you will find in treatises on distillations. And so distil your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which here is the shape as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let there be silver or narrow-bore bronze beneath a small hole, and above it to drip through; and for pressing during distillation use one well-made bronze tool for this purpose, and if you wish take one razor and wrap cotton around its point carefully; then pour your oil or juice into the tube along with whatever medicines you wish, placing the tube in the ear; then insert the razor with all the cotton into the ear, and press your hand temperately until the oil has distilled well from the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillation be one small heated pot over the fire before distilling it into the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not then be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of earplugs
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some perforation in the ears; and the same thing happens with adults through injury to the ear or birth of flesh inside it, and these pluggings sometimes occur deep within the ear so that one cannot see them; sometimes there is a hole missing the aperture, which can be seen well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore the one that comes deep within, so that it cannot be seen, is difficult to treat in many conditions. And for that one which can be seen you should put the patient's ear to the sun and look inside: if you see the opacity clearly, then this is all that this remedy will accomplish among those mentioned here:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	"And it should be sharp and cutting both front and back, entirely full, so that it does not wound the ear; if the growth is of flesh born on the body of the ear, hold it with fine pincers, and cut lightly until all that flesh has been removed."
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the eruptions are deep in the ear, then take a sharp, light razor and heat it slightly on the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the eruption that the patient feels great pain when hearing, pierce it lightly, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear. Then place a plug in the ear according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Continue doing this for a few days until the wound is healed. Then take a bandage and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it; if you see the ear swollen, then it must be that you draw out the bandage and replace it with another moistened in cerote made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone. Then cure it until it is sound."
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	"And if bleeding begins to flow, then dip a sponge and wring it out in cold water, and place it on the ear. Use other remedies that stop bleeding which are found in treatises on distillation."
de la char des papieres	"de la chair des papieres"
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This balm that comes on papers from the eyes when they are moist and dry, you must stretch it with tweezers and forceps, and cut off its roots with a spatula; then put powdered vitriol on the place.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it does not dry out, then cauterize it with a small round cautery and the cautery should be moved after the incision. And many times they are repaired because something remains of their roots; but when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times hailstones come on papers from the eyes, appearing like hail in shape and hardness, and therefore this disease is called "hail," being a collection of thick moisture gathered on the paper above and below; its treatment is such: be aware if the hail moves from one side to another, it is easy to know; then make an incision wide, then lightly scrape each part, then grasp it with forceps, and cut it off.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	But if you cannot cut it off without piercing the paper slightly, it doesn't matter to the patient; and if the split is large, then sew it together, and continue treating until it is healed; but if it is small, do not use force, for ointments will restore it soon.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail descends into the ear towards the top part, turn over the paper, and grasp the hail with forceps and cut it off and press on both sides; and if the paper is pushed back by the incision, do not worry about it. And when the hail has been cut off, rinse the eye with saltwater and cure the place until the patient is healed with flesh-colored skin.
de la graisse des eulz	de la graisse des eulz
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that enters the threads of the papers above, and this happens more often in children than adults, causing great pain to their eyes; they have cataracts in the mornings, and cannot look at sunlight because tears rush into their eyes; therefore, they lay on their faces constantly, sleeping thus, and their papers beneath their eyebrows are wet with moisture, the swelling and appearance being covered by exinach that opens into the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your thumbs on both sides and feel the exit point between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of operating is that the patient puts their head on your hand, and then takes one linen cloth, prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, then places it on them; and presses with their fingers on both sides so that the exirnach gathers within the circle; then cuts with the spatula knife a slit in the middle moisturizing it, not too large but like the wound made in the vein of wine; and cuts the skin deeply until you reach the exirnach; and from various directions comes exirnach from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take out all at once a piece of cloth soaked between your fingers and wipe it back and forth with your hand from right to left until it is spread; and make sure that you do not insert in the slit, so that you do not get all the spatula up to the eye, so that you do not cut it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exirnach does not open at the beginning of the slit, then slightly widen the slit lightly until it appears; then remove it as we have said, then wet cloths in warm and cold water, and place them on the wound, and wipe with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are men who crush mustard seeds and place them atop to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healthy again.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms in a hot location, then treat it with soothing plaster until it heals.
des poilz des papieres	Of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs are born in papers other than those that are natural and are entangled, they harm the eyes and cause diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and cloudiness, so much so that it is the cause of destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to cure it: either by cauterizing together with fire, or by applying hot medicine according to what is written above or the cautery chapter, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by tweezers, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the sick person in your hand, then turn the paper from the eye with your left hand; if it is turned over, that's good; if not, then insert a needle through one thread on top; and whether it is near the edge of the paper or the hairs are born next to these hairs, and pull one thread up all along the paper, and turn it with the razor; then cut with the spatula knife below the paper, below the attached hairs, from the large lacrimal gland to the small; then remove one thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth underneath the paper, then press on the paper with your finger like the mirror bellows, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see lift up the divided paper.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is need to cut a large quantity of the paper according to how the paper is softened; then make two cuts along the lines that you have marked, and begin from the large artery down to the small one; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then place an awl in one of the two angles of the heart, then skin it all; then join the two lips with a stitch made of one thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and cover the excess threads over the two eyebrows with any sticky substance you have; and if not, do not worry about it, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitches using dry and constricting substances, because the paper relieves at the healing of the wound and its closing, but stitches are harmful (as the ancients said), and this is done without fear; and there is another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure that resembles the laurel leaf, as we have described, with three incisions severed according to the shape shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	"Then cut those that exceed the small forces evenly according to the shape shown here."
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread, and insert it into the wound; and place another thread near the large tear, and the second thread near the small one, and draw them evenly between your two fingers; then raise your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have marked it, as we have described; then close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess forms at your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments. Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in both cases is more artistic.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	"The care of the veins is according to this shape: and it is that you invert the paper and cut into it as I have said, and then make two veins artificially, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula; and cut at the two points of the two parts where you hold the threads; then join them together finely above the paper of the oil, and stretch the two veins from the two parts firmly; and leave it thus for a few days, and the skin that is stretched will die, shrink, and dry out until it falls off by itself."
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes time, then cut with forceps, and treat it until it is healed; and when the wound has closed, and the paper has been removed, the hairs will no longer prick. And this is the shape of the two canals that you should make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	"The procedure is as follows: take a fine needle and insert one soft and fine silk thread into it; then join the ends of the threads and tie them together finely, with the length of the threads being a palm long. Then prepare another fine silk thread briefly in the eye of the needle and tie its ends to the thread. Then have the patient put their head on your stomach, and let them be near the sun so that the procedure is clearly visible, for it is a subtle and delicate procedure. Then insert the needle into the root of the hair near the paper, and pierce it quickly until you draw it out over the natural hair. Then pull the hair up to the eye of the needle, and insert that hair if there are one or two or three or more hairs. Then pull your hand so that all the hairs come out of the eye of the needle along with the natural hair."
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	"And if the eye is pierced and the hair does not come out with it, then pull the eye down along all the thread that you have prepared, until the eye comes out of the hole above and you can see it through the vision of the eye. Then pull the eye and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and flesh grows over it. And if the hairs are small, accompany them with one long natural eyebrow hair, and lift it up with that one which you leave, so that it is separated and then lift it up."
de la porriture de l’oil	"About the rottenness of the eye"
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called 'aleacrati' comes into the eye due to decay, there are two types of it: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cut, or burn, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to treat it is that you cut this scab and open its lips, and put linen tampons inside, and let it heal until it is healthy; and you must not use things that dry and constrain in its treatment.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but there are things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altum and linseed boiled, and anointments of diachylon melted in some oil, and one applies a tampon, and treats thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you must be wary that it does not heal in its former shape, and these works that we have said are remedies against this disease, so that it may not return in its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of flesh that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is underneath is truly called 'axacrati', and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident occurs from wound and split and cautery and similar things; and the way of working in it is that you take a needle, with which there is double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eye toward the right, so that the threads come out in two heads of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above all the needle, and cut with one broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to how it should, that is good; but if not, then take one razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make two splits on either side within the paper; and let the heads of the two splits be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are joined together, the figure is like the figure of a letter called 'I Greek'; then remove that flesh according to the quantity that its sides is above it from what holds the paper, then join the two severed parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then attend to the care of those moistening medicines, and dressings, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from split or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a full cut under the hairs of the paper, and according to what was said before; then open between the two leaves of a bandage, as I have said. And one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and skilled masters devise every means possible to make the figure return to its natural shape. And the sick person himself, according to what he needs in remedies and instruments, varies in many ways.
dou soudement de la papiere	Of the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suddenness happens to many people in such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural works, it is necessary then that you put the point of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, until you cut what is too thick with a fine scissor, which should not be too thick nor too sharp, so that the sick person cannot suffer that the scissor cut too much or scratch the eye. And let your incision, from which you peel off that which is stuck together, be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural shape; and all that is stuck together is healed, and sometimes they make in the eye salted water, and wash it with fresh water, and with collyrium. Then put between the paper and the eye a linen bandage, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in egg yolk. And afterwards on the third day use collyrium and things that soothe until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the corner is in two ways: it is nerve-like and resembles one hard pimple, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles a white moist congealed blister, such that when touched with iron and attempted to be grasped with pincers, it cannot be seized. And both of these appearances begin towards the large tear duct and gradually grow larger until they cover all of the eye's vision and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the sick person puts their head in your hand, then opens their eyes; and you lift the paper with your hand, then grasp the corner with pincers of small width, and stretch it upwards. Then take a needle, and put one horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and one strong thread on it; and double the point of the needle slightly and stick it into the corner, and pierce it all the way through with the needle, and tie the corner with a thread and stretch it upwards, and peel off everything along the side of the corner that faces the pupil and the skin up to the head, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with the fine scissors and small forceps, and leave the natural flesh in the tear duct so that by the incision the usual course of tears is not obstructed. And sometimes they stretch the corner only with the onyx and the thread, as we have said; then they peel it off with the soft scissors according to this shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the spatula does not touch the soft flesh and tear it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision, pour a little of fine-ground barley into the eye, and make a poultice with litargite, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, this kind of nail is often cured with medicines; and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you cover it with coppersmith, then the eye of the patient works, and take a light spatula with a little point according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And carefully lift up the nail and if you see that it does not thin and the reason presses upon it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a poultice made of litargite and red collyrium and ground barley, and stop up the eye until the next day; then resume the other operation according to this same work, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is any obstacle in the eye that opposes this operation, such as a hot aposteme, then apply cold compresses and first treat the hot aposteme until it is healed; then resume the operation as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid causes great harm to the eye, then suspend it with a needle and cut off part of it but not all, so that tears do not come into it; then apply red collyrium made of litargite.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	And regarding the flesh that grows upon the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In the eyes of some men, red flesh sometimes appears, covering the pupil and restricting it on the papers and turning it towards the forehead, resembling a pomegranate; and its work is that the patient places his head in your hand, then opens his eyes, and curls all that flesh with appropriate tweezers, and holds it firmly; then cut the first layer of flesh, and continue cutting until the end with a razor, taking care not to wound the eye during the operation; and let the incision be as we have said in the cutting of the nail and in the small forces with which one removes the eyelash, as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply the eye with crushed saffron or distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton on the eye afterwards with egg white so that it is secure from hot abscess; and if anything remains and hot blood overflows, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with things that calm hot abscess; then return to your operation until it is clean, and do thus for all flesh joined in the eye by this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	"But nonetheless you must align the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural course; and in case of an accident, especially with ironwork; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that these members can withstand this work."
des voines des eulz	"of the veins of the eyes"
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Before there are red veins that cover the eye, they veil its work and weaken sight every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, it is the first duty to check if the eye where there is a cataract is healthy, and if there is no other visible disease besides the cataract; then proceed thus: instruct the patient to put their head in your hand, then gently pluck those veins on either side according to your skill, and let the pliers be double like this:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	"And there should be two bandages placed at intervals along one course according to this shape:"
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	"Then carefully press the veins with force using these bandages and remove the blood afterwards as often as you see the veins come out from the eye; but make sure not to scratch the eye with the points of the tweezers, and perform this work at midday before the sun, being very careful in your work so that you do not squeeze anything but the veins; then distill green and red collyrium onto the eye to dissolve what remains of the sebaceous matter."
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	"And if you are unable to completely remove it in that hour, then apply a plaster made from soothing substances for the pain of the eyes onto the eye and leave it on for a few days until the pain is appeased and you are sure there is no hot abscess, then resume according to this manner before until it is healed; and here is the shape of the pressure:"
de la fistule de l’oil	"of the fistula of the eye"
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The physicians call a fistula "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and burning hot medicine according to what I have said before, but if it is not clean, then there is something inside that you should cut into, on the abscess where it should break open, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then take all the instruments that are here; this is called "aspre chief" (biting head), and it should be made of hard iron with one sharp point like a file as it appears in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the instrument on the decayed bone, then turn it between your two hands and press down a little until you know that all of the corruption has been removed; do this several times, then return to the application of drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is closed, and flesh grows, and the body of the bow remains closed, and remains so for forty days, and it does not heal or become inflamed, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healthy; but if not, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nostril like this: and it is necessary to uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with hot medicines, and when it is uncovered, take an auger according to this shape, and let the iron head have three angles, and thin the wood up to the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the bone near the ear, and move your hand away from the eye then twist all of the forceps until it pierces the bone and the patient feels by this that the vein is hit if they keep their hand on their nose; and then restore to its place with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the places, then the matter goes to the nose; so it becomes easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	Regarding the issue from the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye is completely open and there is no disturbance to the nostril or diminution of sight, then you must bind up the patient; then cleanse it and put cupping glasses on without cauterizing to suck out the humour. Then place a liniment made of aloes, acacia, incense, and storax on the eye and compress it, and cover it with bandages and cloths. The manner of applying the cloths is that you should take soft cloths and fold each one four times, then place them on top of each other according to how much the eye needs; then bind them on firmly with a hard bandage, and recommence the cupping glasses without cauterizing to suck out the humour. Then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the liniment becomes moist, then you must change it often. Then remove the liniment after one day and night, and if you see that the eye is healing, that is good; but if not, then recommence the emplastering and bandages and liniment and cupping glasses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Regarding the bursting of a blood vessel in the eye
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a rupture occurs in the tissue of the eye and opens up, and paper-like substances come forth like grains of resin, and it is frightening to see, then if you wish to heal it, do as follows: take a needle and insert it into the root of the lower part until it reaches the upper part; then take another needle with a double thread from the side of the nostril, and let it pierce through there. Then tie one end of the thread around one part of the uvea, and compress it well, then remove the needle and place linen moistened in egg yolk on the eye. Leave it until the blood coagulates with the uvea, then dress the wound with comforting substances until it is healed. And sometimes the wound is restricted by the uvea on every side with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye has a large opening, then pierce it with a thin spatha (needle) which comes from deep within the eye, and draw out the moist albuginous humour which descends into the eye. Then withdraw it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	Regarding the bowing of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but water gathered in the eye, resembling descending acqueous humor, yet it is not aqueous humor; and its manner of appearance during surgery is thus: have the patient sit on an appointed and upright seat, then take their head between your hands on either side, and turn their face until you see the water rise above your eyes; then pierce it, let it descend and remove the obstruction to light, so that the patient can see things as they used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is aqueous humor, but if the descent of the water is not arranged as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and pierce through the corneal membrane 1 inch along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown until the boil comes out; and when it has come out, distill hot water mixed with honey or fennel boiled in water into the eye, then dress it further until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Regarding the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have shown here the similar waters used for dividing and what should be pierced; so work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You must make the patient sit between your crossed hands away from sunlight and tie down the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper for the eye in your left hand if the eye is on the left, or your right hand if it's on the right. Then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the eye is on the left, or your left hand if it's on the right. Place the tip of the almagda next to the cornea by the thickness of a ray at the part towards the lesser lachrymal cartilage. Then gently push the almagda and turn your hand until you feel that it reaches the empty space inside the eye. The length of the almagda's passage should be equal to the distance from the pupil to the end of the blackness. You will then see the bone through the corneal clarity on the paper, so place the instrument at the location where the water is and squeeze it under one vein after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water rises now, then the patient sees before them and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a moment, and if the water rises again through the second passage, place the funnel with the instrument. When it is inserted and it does not rise, then gently remove the almagd by turning your hand little by little; then add a little gemstone salt to the water and lift it from the eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place before the eye plugs made of wet wool in rose oil and egg whites, binding it with healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, we and those of our time place commin broie upon it with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are certain people who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then pierce only the conjunctiva, not too deep but make it subtle; then insert the almagd as we have said. When the work is complete, prepare for the patient a suitable dark room where they can sleep on their back in darkness; keep them still from all movements, let them eat light foods, and do not move their head to the right or left; bind them according to their condition until the third day; then unbind them in that same dark house, test their sight, show them some objects, and if they can see, then rebind them for seven days. Do not perform this during the hour of cautery or after incision now, but wait until it has been alleviated because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess appears that is hot, you should uncover the eye before the seventh day, and apply the ointment for soothing abscesses; and once it has been soothed, then uncover the sight and place over its face a lint bandage to cover it for some days, and keep it always in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then little by little leave the house, and return to its case; and know that no disciple should meddle in this matter.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And there came to us one from the East who told us that in some lands people perform almagda piercing, from which they suck out water, but nevertheless I have never seen any of them in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, so that those who do not know them may see them; and let them be made of pure gold:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their heads should be of this same subtlety, and the back in three sharp angles.
de la char sor le neis	Here are some ways to treat flesh growing on the nail:
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes various kinds of joints are born twisted, among which some seem like scorpians with many feet; and there are some where the flesh is colored with foul hue, and there is also soft flesh with good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Therefore, in that soft flesh which is not foul-colored, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils and throw the onion onto those joints, burn it; then take what you can hold with a subtle sharp spoon from one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any remains that cannot be scraped off, then open it with one of the thin and light instruments so that nothing remains; and if you get tired or feel faintness or heat, then wash it cleanly with cold water, as is necessary; and if they are malignant ulcers, hurry and cauterize them until the inflammation is reduced and all the flesh has been removed, then apply honey and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose works but moisture reaches the palate, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is bone marrow in the upper jaw, to which the instrument cannot reach: therefore, you must insert a thread of linen somewhat thick, and moistened with hot water, and have between each node a space of one finger or less. And let the patient place the head of the thread in his nostril with some force, and draw it through while smelling until it comes out through the mouth; and children often do this at school, and it is an easy thing for whoever wishes to do it. Then hold the head that comes out through the nostril with one hand, and the other head that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and know them both in succession by feeling them, as we who are skilled do.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the nodes have rotted that piece of flesh, then pull out the thread, squeeze out the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian oil, and put it back into the nostril as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has rotted all the remaining flesh. Then put a wick of lead into the nostril for several days until it is healthy, and if there is a need for drying medicines, use them. And this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be made of silver or brass, like an open lamp or a tube, and the funnel should also be made like this; and if you want to, make one with a closed tube, so that the instrument is full for purging the head. And let there be many holes at the top to hold it while heating the oil or any other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Here are some ways to treat flesh growing on the nail:
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	"Frequently at the head, there occurs an illness called 'telul', which grows and becomes large enough to be seen; therefore, you must cut it off at its beginning, and remove all of its fur, then place on it a cautery or burning medicine. But if you delay cutting it until it is large, take care if it is hard, of dark color, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted boil. For when it is cut, great evil comes upon the patient. But if the boil is soft to the touch, not of dark color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then the patient empties and is cut without fear, and the wound is cured with drying and constricting things."
quant li neis est copez et cosus	"When the boil is cut and closed"
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know this: when humors accumulate in one of these joints, they profit little there, especially in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Thus, when this occurs in someone, examine if the wound is fresh with all its blood. Then join the two lips with a stitch, and dress it until it is clean. If the lips are already separated on both sides, then you must scrape away all the rotten parts of their flesh until they are clean. Then join the two lips with a stitch, and bind them, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood powder and crushed incense upon them. And place upon the powders a piece of strong magnet or another adhesive plaster, and let it remain there until it falls off by itself. Then dress it with ointment until it is clean.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	"The method of stitching is as follows: either by needles, as we have said in the case of abdominal suturing; or by thread, as I have shown you."
des apostemes des levres	"boils on the lips"
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many men suffer within the lips an abscess hard as grains of wheat, some smaller and others larger; therefore, you must turn back the lips, cut on each knot, grasp it with forceps and cut in every part. Then apply powdered vitriol to the wound after incision until the blood is staunched; then apply a poultice, and dress the place with dry things until it is clean.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times there arises on the gums attached flesh which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore you must hold it with forceps and cut at its root, and let flow the bow or blood. Then apply powdered vitriol or other restrictive and drying powders to the wound; and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: for it will not return after the cautery. These are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of boils
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are gathered together at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scales which are ugly and harsh. And sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish-green and worms so that corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink. Therefore you must make the sick person sit between your hands, with their chin in your lap, and raise the teeth where the scales appear until there is nothing left; and thus do for the blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other stains, until they are clean; and if you remove what is at the first cause, it is good. If not, then begin again on the second day and the third until you have everything cleaned out. Know that teeth require various forms of instruments to clean according to what the work shows, for the instruments used to clean between teeth have different shapes than those used to clean around them; and these shapes and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you are treating a toothache, you must delay extraction as long as possible, for it is not right to do otherwise; for this is a very high substance until one has no excuse for extracting.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained by thirst, you must be certain of the tooth that is aching.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain leaves the patient, and they believe it is in the wisdom tooth, and have the good tooth pulled. But still the pain does not depart by this means, for we have often seen this in such cases; and when you are certain of the aching tooth, then you must scrape around the tooth with a strong spatula to guard the gum on all sides. Then move it slightly with your fingers or delicate pliers, bit by bit, until it is well loosened. Then firmly grasp it with the pliers. And hold the patient's head steady between your knees, so that they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take any of these instruments and put it gently on each side, and with the lever move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and wobbles, then you must fill it with wool where the hole is; and grasp it subtly with forceps so that it does not break when extracting; and there must be much bleeding around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And see to it that you do not break it, and if a piece remains, it will cause the patient greater pain due to the root's mischief.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeons who, out of haste and recklessness, sometimes break the jawbone and bring about what we have described; but they often cause serious illness through their carelessness in dealing with the roots left behind or the jawbone broken. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine, oil, and salt; and if bleeding continues, as it often does, sprinkle powdered vitriol on the spot; and if that does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments with which one first moves the teeth should be long-pointed and thick-handled, so that they do not bend when extracting a tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of large limbs so that they do not bend at all during traction, and let them be of iron well-made, and let them be toothed for holding movement.
de la racine des dens	Of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains at the draw, you must put moistened cotton smeared with butter on it for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 until the joint is softened, then insert the tweezers called "algefri", with which the head resembles a bird's beak; and they should be shaped inside like a file.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called 'althali', that is, the crowbar, of which this is the shape:"
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	"And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root pops out because of this, that is good. If not, then help yourself with all the tools, of which the shapes come hereafter:"
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if one uses this tool that has two handles, of which this is the shape:"
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	"and other iron tools that are before in the reason of the teeth, and of this tool that resembles large pliers, of which this is the shape:"
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	"And let these tools be strong so that they cannot break, and know that there are many dental tools; and also other tools, which are not counted. And the wise master finds his own tool according to what his work and illness show him, for there are such illnesses where the ancient did not teach any tool due to the diversity of them. And if one breaks the cartilage or other bones where it could fit, then look for the tools that you need, which I have told you about, and help yourself with gestures, of which this is the shape:"
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	"And let them be thick and hold well to hold the bone so that it does not slip away but can hold and remove it; and then restore it with appropriate medicine for that place. And if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then scrape it out with all these tools:"
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	"When teeth appear not according to their natural position, and the shape is unsightly, especially in young girls, then you must know if the tooth is close behind the tooth, and not in its proper place, and it cannot be seen or filed. Then scrape it away. And if it is aired with the tooth, then take this tool of which this is the shape, resembling a small beak, made of iron sharpened at the end:"
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	"And tap the tooth lightly every day for several days to soften it and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent enough to be filed, then file it with such a file as this one has here its shape:"
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	"And it is also like the file used to make needles. And file the tooth lightly every day with this file so that it does not move too much until it falls out. Then plane the end with any smoother, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file down its sharpness enough so that it no longer cuts the tongue nor impairs speech."
quant li dent lochent	"When teeth lock"
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth in front of the joint becomes dislodged, either by injury or falling, and the patient cannot chew without causing pain, and you have tried medicine to tighten it but it is ineffective; then you must fasten it with a gold wire, for silver wire turns green and rots, but gold does not change. And let the wire be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth. If you need to align the teeth, take the wire and wrap it double around the two healthy teeth first, then place the head between the loose teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side. Then start wrapping again up to where you started, and hold your hand gently and steadily so that it does not move; and let your knot be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot come loose.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grasp the teeth of the string with a pair of pliers, and bring them together, and push them between the healthy tooth's roots, placing it so that it does not injure the tongue; then leave it tightly fitted as long as possible, and if it comes undone or the strings rotate, hold it fast with another string. It will remain thus throughout its time, forming the teeth and aligning the two healthy ones, and the two molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	"And when teeth fall out, if one replaces them in their place, gradually as we have said; and let not the foolish and impatient meddle with it. And sometimes they make the shape of a tooth from cow bone, and put it in the place where there is a gap, and hold it thus as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time."
de coper lou liien de la lengue	"To cure the tie of the tongue"
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Never does this bond occur naturally at birth or by chance due to an old wound. Its treatment is as follows: open the patient's mouth and place their head in your hand, raise their tongue, then grasp and cut the frenulum from its base until the tongue is released from its attachment. If there is any scar tissue or callous, it is from an old wound, so insert a nail under it and cut through that bond as well. Be careful not to cut too deeply for fear of injuring the artery below. Once you have done this, rinse with rosewater and sage, or cold water, then place a linen pad underneath the tongue each night to prevent reattachment.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, grind vitriol and apply it to the spot; and if blood continues to flow, cauterize with a slow-acting cautery that is suitable for this purpose; then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you see it as of a livid or black color or hard and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre. And if it tends towards blenching and there is moisture present, use an onion and a sharp, fine spatula to scratch it open on both sides; and if bleeding occurs from your procedure, apply powdered vitriol until it stops flowing, then return to your procedure until all the furuncle is treated. Then rinse with sage and celandine, and treat it with other remedies until it is completely healed."
des apostemes de la gorge	Here is a translation of the text you provided about swollen glands in the neck:
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes, in the throat, bubbles called 'godath' appear; these are properly called tonsils. When treated as described in the division and they do not heal, beware: if it is a hard abscess with a small opening and dark color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for fear of bleeding; but let it ripen until it is ripe, then you can cut it open where it will break naturally. And if it is white with a small root, prepare the instrument to lance it, but first check if the abscess is warm and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore make the patient sit before the sun, and his head in your hand, and he opens his mouth and takes the servant between his hands, and presses the tongue below with all the instrument, of which this is the form; and it should be made of silver or refined brass like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	"And when you press the tongue with the whole instrument and see the abscess, then take the awl and drive it into the amygdala. Then twist it upward as far as you can; wipe some lint with it, then cauterize with the instrument, which is shaped like a pair of tongs; but the ends are curved inward toward each other and very sharp. It is made of iron or bronze:"
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if you do not have this instrument at hand, cut it with pincers, which are shaped thus:"
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	"And it is sharp on one side and blunt on the other. And when you have cut one of the amygdalae, cut the other in the same manner, then after the incision, let the patient gargle with hot water and salt water, and if there is bleeding, let the patient gargle with water or decoctions of pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves, and similar things until the blood is stanched. Then treat it until it is healed. And sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two amygdalae, so cut them in the same way as the two amygdalae."
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was almost inside her throat, namely an abscess of small sense; and she had closed her throat so much that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she remained thus for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had already risen so much that it had filled both passages of the throat with two raindrops each.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I therefore acted quickly, and inserted a needle into one passage of the throat, then pulled it out and with it drew out a large portion of pus; afterwards I inserted another needle into the other passage of the throat, opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; then I inserted the needle into these abscesses and cut off part of them, from which only a little blood came out. And thus the woman's throat was unblocked, and she began to drink water and then wine, but I did not stop cutting at this abscess for a long time; and it kept growing back, filling up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large again. Then I excised and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it remained without growing any more; and I left these parts, and I do not know what God did with her afterwards.
de l’uve	"de l'uve"
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When it comes down to the eye, and it is swollen and extended, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below thick and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help at all, and you see that the swelling of the wound is soothed, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and that which is round gathered and not long; and it is sanguine or deep colored or black, then you must avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient in doing so.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its blenching and lengthening, you must make the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned earlier; then insert a needle into the eye, draw it underneath, and cut at the first two instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two tendons.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut more than the excess that exceeds the natural limit; for if you cut more, it harms the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two testes, until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears being cut, then you must use a device for cauterization to alleviate their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of cautery is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is necessary for the patient to place their head in your hand, and then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned in the cautery chapter, and heat it with live charcoal so that it is neither too thick nor too thin; and use this tool gently, of which there is a drawing here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And at the head there should be a hair, on which one puts the medicine, like the horse's tail of a spoonful, and places the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and the patient should lie on their side so that saliva and mucus run from their mouth away from the medicine towards it, so that it does not reach the throat or the belly. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour until you see it blackened and the biting of the medicine is calmed; and if you see fit, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with all the cotton in the cannus above until the cotton reaches the eye. And do this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry and falls off after four or five days. And if you need to restart the cautery of the medicine, then restart it, and afterwards wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in warm oil, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and gargle until healed."
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	"This cure is safer than the incision or cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamus and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and mugwort and similar herbs, and combine them all or some of them in one pot, and put it on the fire to boil. And let the pot be well sealed with clay, and inside the pot there should be an instrument shaped like this:"
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or brass, and one end should be placed in the patient's mouth until steam rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is killed. Then resume this often until the eye is dried out, but make sure you do not do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many things can happen; and do not do this more than necessary.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a cane and put at its top an eggshell, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell does not let the steam burden the mouth, and it is good together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	"Many times a bone from the throat or spine of a fish, or any other thing, gets stuck in the throat; therefore you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you see it move. And what you cannot see and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the thing will come out through vomiting. Or the patient may swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of flax, or a root of lettuce, or a small piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will be seen, and then pull it out. And if it does not come out from what we have said, then take an instrument of lead made in this shape:"
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	"And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head raised high. And make sure not to touch the epiglottis, lest the whole thing come loose, nor push the bone in; but rather let the patient put in the instrument themselves, for they will know where the thing is stuck. Then draw it out straight along the entire length of the instrument until it comes out completely."
de la sansue de la gorge	Here's a possible translation for "de la sansue de la gorge":
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is bloodletting used, as I have said in the division, by the use of remedies; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, since you press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see blood vessels, then draw them out little by little with tweezers, or with fine forceps suited for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if bleeding does not help, then take a cane tipped with iron and put it into the patient's throat, then put at the tip of the cane a hot piece of iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	If the patient sweats all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full cup of cold water, open the mouth and pour it in without allowing it to be swallowed, moving it with your hand frequently; and as soon as the blood senses the water, it falls.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye. Do this many times; it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is this: you take a pot that has live coals in it, and cover the pot with a cloth pierced in the middle, and place the head of the instrument through this hole. Then throw your fumigation onto it, and the patient puts the end of the tube into their mouth, closing the mouth so that no smoke escapes, but goes directly to the blood; and the blood will fall now, and if it does not fall, then begin the fumigation again many times. Let the patient suffer thirst, eat salty and stale foods, and do not drink water; then it will be necessary for it to come out through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	"And the shape of the instrument with which to treat the stone is like this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved forceps used for entering the throat; it should resemble the bill of a goose and have sharpness like that of a lime so that what it grasps, it cannot let go. See here its form:"
li chapistres des apostemes	Chapter on Abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many sorts of abscesses are described hereafter in this book, according to the memories that come to mind, and they differ in perforation and incision; and there are two kinds of them, one being similar in appearance, and those that are moist.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the places where they occur on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and those on fatty tissue are different from those that come in joints; each has its own judgment in operation.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And there are abscesses that should not be pierced until the bowel has completed its movement; and there are others that must be pierced when they have grown hard, even if they do not complete their maturation.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses occur near joints and are left until they are completely surrounded by pus, sometimes the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where an abscess is near the main member, and if you delay its perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the main member. Where it is near the fundament, pierce it before it dies. It is not necessary to pierce a hard abscess without digestion completed, except for one that is near the fundament which could rot inwardly and form a fistula; thus it cannot heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	"And you should know the time for performing an incision on an abscess that has fully ripened and burst: it is when pain eases, fever subsides, inflammation and redness diminish, and when the apex of the abscess becomes soft and pointed; and other signs. And it is necessary to perform the incision where the abscess hangs down most, or where it opens most; and the incision should be long, along the length of the body. If the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints near nerves and arteries, and in all smooth places without wrinkles."
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In cases where it pleases, according to this member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the flesh, it is best that you delay their perforation until they are firm and digestion is complete, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before this time, the body of the venom will spread out and be full of much filth; and sometimes its lips harden and its depth becomes difficult.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And some abscesses should be pierced according to the width of their body, according to what the member requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must bring small incisions, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many slits according to the likeness of the size of the abscess; and there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut out and cauterize; when they have become as hard as stones, and are mortified, then one must do likewise as with buboes: and there are such that are split into three angles, and there are such whose edges are cut like the leaves of myrtle, as angelic abscesses; and there are such where a round incision is made, and other incisions and similar cauterization.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, like superficial soft abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them plainly; and when the abscess is large, and it has filled much bowels, and you pierce it, then do not draw out all the bowels at that hour, but draw out a part; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more again; do this many times gradually, until all the bowels come out; likewise if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying child, or young children, or old men decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Because sometimes the spirit leaps with the release of the bowstring, causing the patient to die unexpectedly.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Be cautious then in this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, so open the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small. And if it is a full incision, bring linen or old cotton bandages; and if it is a large abscess with many openings, then you must place in each one a bandage so that they come together. And if you have cut off some skin from the abscess and have shaved around it, then you must fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth shreds without moisture, and bind it for three days; then open it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your procedure, bring cold water and a basin, wet a cloth in it, and place it on the bleeding area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blood continues to flow, you should apply treatment and care, using the powders I have mentioned in this book. If it is wintertime and the location of the boil is very nervous, then you must place moistened cloths heated with wine and oil on it; and if it is summertime and the location is fleshy, then you must place moistened cloths in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day. Then remove the dressing and cleanse and treat it as necessary, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	"And this one should universally know in the treatment of abscesses": I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is that chapter.
des soros	Here are some key points about boils (soros):
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	And small boils come from the head, and they are like those on hens' wattles, appearing in large numbers.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and moist like chickens; and there are others that are hard and bony when cut into, without any doubt that the artery opposes them.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And this is how one performs the procedure of amputation: first, test all instruments called 'entromissoires', from which the form comes that follows, and what they contain.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	But if it contains moisture, then open it carefully over a long period.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And once the moisture is emptied, scrape carefully without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately if anything is left behind; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, use water and salt to fill the wound, and leave it until the next day; and these are the things that remain from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then begin again with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you are sure that none remains from the night; then dress the wound with suitable ointment, until it is clean.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess is full of fat, cut it according to this form, carefully; then insert your tweezers and scrape from all sides, and focus all your efforts on drawing out the coat where it resides; and if the artery opposes you, do what I tell you later.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And similarly, cauterize an abscess if it is hard, cut it open, and treat it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cutting into a hard and moist abscess is easier, since there is little blood involved.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And some of these abscesses have no moisture at their head, such as the ones I recorded on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone that could not be broken, so that if one had struck it, it would have made a wound like that from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming at the head, especially those that come at the heads of children and at the roots of ears, one should open them at their lowest point every day so that the bowels may issue forth, and treat them as necessary.
des scrophules	"of scrofulas"
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and under the armpits, and among the anus, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and are interconnected.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each boil is properly inside its skin, like a pimple or a wound on the head, as we have said; and there are many kinds of these boils.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are evil ones that do not wish to obey healing.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Therefore, when you see one with a good appearance to the touch, and it is similar in color to the skin, moves from each side and is not hard near the nerves of the neck nor the artery nor the vein, and is not deep; then you should cut it open on top, scrape away from each part, and draw apart the two edges of the heart once, if necessary, as we have said regarding head abscesses; and cut a little at a time, ensuring that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and that the knife is neither too sharp nor too dull, so that your hand does not slip, and do not cut too deeply, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, then put powdered vitriol or some powders that stop blood into the wound, and press on the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased and the wound begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is stopped, return to your work until you finish it; then check on your finger if there are any small scabs remaining, cut them and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, then do not cut that scab at its root, but tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it fall off without harm; then fill the wound with Egyptian oil-soaked cotton wool, then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the entire scab, then it is necessary that you join the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that there remains no excess due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you must understand to cut the root of it, and draw out fire, and stitch as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that hold excessiveness, prick where it appears dead; and prick thus as the aforementioned one, depending on it, then bring tents with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, then treat it with ointment entering flesh until it is healed.
de squinance	de squinance could refer to "squinance" in Old French, which means "a kind of skin disease, scrofula".
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	"This is what the ancients said and spoke about the incision of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the record of their words."
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have strangulation, the epiglottis, which is called "epiglotte", must be avoided; and do not attempt aid through this method, for all the veins and the membrane of the patient are hot in the mouth or throat or in both.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the membrane, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it below three circles or through a small cut across two circles, between the second and third cartilages, not in the cartilage; these are the places where the section of the epiglottis is made without flesh, and the vessels are long there.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, he should extend the skin of the throat as far as possible, then cut towards the chin until it reaches it; avoid the blood vessels if you see any, and then cut the thyroidea membrane as we have said; this is demonstrated by the section of the thyroidea membrane that spurts fire where it is broken, and by the loss of voice; leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the critical hour has passed during which strangulation might occur, then bring together the two lips of the wound in the flesh and stitch it up without including the cartilage; afterward administer medicines that promote healing until it is whole again.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that this procedure should not be done unless the patient's throat is completely blocked and they are judged to be near death, otherwise there will be damage.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	**Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death; and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and dress it until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.**
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	**I saw that a young woman took the knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting part of the channel of the windpipe; and I was called to heal her, but found her already dead.**
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I examined the wound and saw that blood had come out of it, and I knew that she had not cut her veins or arteries except for those in her throat, from which the windpipe was protruding through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	**I hastened and stitched the wound, dressing it until it was healed; but the young woman had only one fault, she was left hoarse of voice, and afterward returned to her state. Therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis there is no fear.**
de la grosse gorge	of a large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This bump is called "throat hernia", and it is a large bump with the color of a bruise, most common in women; it occurs in two ways: naturally, and accidentally; where the natural one has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one occurs in two ways: one is similar to a fatty lump, and the other resembles an arterial bruise; there is fear in this case, but one should only operate with fire on those that are small, and first prove and search with all the instruments: if you find it as big as one's fist, and not attached to any vein, cut it like you would a fatty lump, and remove its skin completely if necessary; examine everything carefully, and treat it appropriately until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	fatty tumors
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many kinds of lumps exist, all of which I will describe their similarities; now I must say the whole difference between a lump and an ulcer.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is heat and fever lasting until the ebullition has passed, and corruption is completed; then fever and heat cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the nodule there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains yellowish matter, which is its own fluid and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a cistern, and becomes large; and they are according to two similarities, either fatty or moist, and most of them are as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat dislocation, first examine and inquire about all the instruments called "intromittent" according to how their forms come in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiry into the apostemes of the nose is that you take the softest place that you find in the aposteme, and twist your fingers bit by bit until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the aposteme; then extract the foreign body, and beware of what comes out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture flows out, whatever its color, cut it like I said for other apostemes; and if no moisture comes after the foreign body, know that it is fatty, so cut it in cross shape, grasp it with forceps, lightly scrape each side, and guard the skin where it lies that you may draw it out intact with the nodule; and if you cannot draw it out intact, draw it out in pieces until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If anything remains there, it returns again many times; and if a bit remains, and the blood becomes inflamed, then apply to the wound some corrosive waters, bind the wound, and place on it soothing hot poultices until it is healed. And if the inflammation is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and heal it with those that enter into flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beating is against you or another thing hastens itself and applies the powder of ground vitriol to the place, let it lie for two or three days until the wound purges itself and rests from ebullition of blood; then return to cut out what remains of the dislocation.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the shapes of the intruding instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. There are three square ones called "albaret," and one called "breb." They come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, for encircling fistular abscesses. They are also like the needles used to sew wounds, made of citrine bronze or iron or silver. Those that are yellow are most valued, but black ones are more commonly used to encircle fistular openings. They come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of onions are of many kinds, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are onions that have two loops in three ways; and there are onions that have three loops, and they are also of three kinds; and there are onions that have two loops, and onions with one loop only, and they are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these tools with which one cuts are sharp, and there are some that do not cut but from one side, for which reason one scrapes the skin off to avoid cutting the vein or nerve; and among these instruments are alembics placed in hands so that the patient does not perceive them when opening abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are only used on thick flesh, such as legs, arms, breasts, angles, and similar places; and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling a fist's knuckles, according to this shape, with which one squeezes blood out.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	"And it is sometimes placed at the site where there is danger of cutting veins or arteries, and some are made in this large size:"
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never do the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like those of a woman; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to treat them, let him do it according to this form from line .b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat, and dress the wound with healing herbs mixed with honey, then join the two lips of the wound together to sew them up, and let it heal until it is clean; and if the breast hangs down and is softened due to its size as happens in women, then cut it across into two parts above with two similar incisions; so that one touches the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line .b. up to line .g.; then scrape off the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary for healing until it is clean; and if it is not clean, or the incision is not complete because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; leave it until it consumes the remaining fat, then heal it until it is clean.
des apostemes des asselles	"Boils in the armpits"
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	"These boils that appear under the arms are hard, with knots, and some contain moisture."
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	He who contains moisture must have the following form cut from the line .b. to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when all the matter inside the boil has been emptied out, then fill the wound with cotton wool and leave it until the following day, then remove all the cotton wool and dress it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed."
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	"If the boil resembles a scrofula, then incise it as we have said for scrofula incisions, and if the wound discharges matter, then apply a cautery as we have said before."
de la routure de l’artere	"Surgical procedure for arterial bleeding"
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is severed and the skin above it is closed, abscesses often form, and likewise when a vein is swollen with an abscess; and one can tell how this occurs by recognizing that if it's due to the artery, the abscess will be long and deep; but if you sense it with your fingers, it feels like a pulling sensation; and if it's due to the vein, the swelling appears prominent on the surface. It is foolish to cut into this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits, at the angles, or around the neck, and in many other places, where it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to avoid the cautery of iron and likewise for the one who is at the head; also avoid cutting into one that has burst due to an arterial injury. Instead, cut along the length of the skin above the artery; then make an incision through the folds and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed. Then insert a needle underneath and pierce it through to the other side, and tie the artery with a doubled thread at two points, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples. Then prick the point between the two ties with an introductor until the blood comes out and the abscess is emptied. Then dress the wound as for an ordinary boil until it heals; but if the abscess is due to a vein incision, then take hold of what you can grasp of the skin around the abscess, then insert the needle underneath where you are holding, pierce it through, and tie it with a doubled thread so that you can draw it out from the other side. Then ligate the abscess as I have told you, tying the threads on either side at two points; but if you doubt that the threads may come loose, then insert another needle underneath all of the threads along the entire length of the abscess at the incision of the first needle and tie them at four points. Then cut into the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cut away the excess flesh and leave what is tied. Finally, place a warm compress soaked in wine and oil on it, then dress it with ointments and bandages until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	"Boils on the nerves"
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	"So boils can also occur on nerves when they are struck or from too much physical exertion and similar causes."
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often at the shoulders and hips, and in all places where there are joints. It is the most grievous abscesses, their color resembling that of the flesh, and they are in many dispositions without pain; but when pressed strongly, the patient feels pain, not deep within the body, but beneath the breast; it moves well in all directions but does not go forward or backward nor up or down. That which is in joints should not be cut with iron: there might be contraction thereupon. And those that are on the head or forehead make the skin rough at the scalp.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, take it with tweezers and cut it at its root; but if it is large, suspend it with a hook and scrape it off, then remove the skin and sew the wound shut. Care for it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	"hanging pouches"
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in bellies and not elsewhere; it is an illness called 'fungus' because of its likeness. The roots are thin, the heads are large; some are small and others very large. I saw a man who had two on his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, with no difference between them. They were white, had a fine root, and were slightly split open, from which moisture constantly flowed.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found one weighing XVIII ounces, and the other VI З., and the work of the incision is such that you should look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is pale and moist with a subtle root; then cut it with a wide spatula, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	If there are many large blood flows during cutting, and if the blood overcomes you, then hurry with the cauterizer. But if the patient is frightened and afraid of the iron incision, take a well-made lead thread, tie it around the artelul as we have said, and leave it for two days; then tighten it, and keep tightening the lead thread until it cuts the artelul without effort; and if the roots are large, be careful when cutting near the belly, but you can cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return. Then dress the wound, and make sure not to cut the thelul which is of fox color and poor sense.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an enchanted aposteme, and I will come to the cure of cancer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil has burst
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from a wound cautery or a fissure in the skin, and it is on the belly and in some cases of the beard, as happens with other eruptions, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries, according to what was said earlier, or from windiness; and if it is due to the eruption of the small intestine and the outlet of the gut, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and has diverse outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the outlet of the intestines, then it is more diverse. And when you press it with your fingers, it rises up and then returns. And sometimes it is seized, and greatly enlarged at the entrance of the anus and by violent effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining; and if it is due to blood, then the abscess appears large and hard, and is fixed according to quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to touch, and its appearance indicates whether it is from arterial or venous blood, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bladder, you must command the patient to tie his loincloth and lie down straight, then place a bolster around his belly. Then make him lie on his side between your hands, then go around the place where you have made the incision with the scalpel, then stretch half of the abscess up towards the greater trochanter. Then bind it around with a strong thread or silk cord tightly, and let the knot be free. Then open half of the abscess lying on the ligature, and put your index finger in and seek the intestine. If you find it caught by the ligature, untie it and put the intestine back into its place in the belly. And if you find the bladder, take it with pincers and cut off the excess. And if the artery or vein opposes you, go around carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two strong threads through them, and pierce the needles crosswise where you made the incision. Then hold the abscess in four places on the needles, and if it bleeds, remove the needles and leave the place until it closes by itself, and cut away the dead flesh when it becomes subtle and ripe. Then treat the area as necessary, and remove the abscess as we have said; then extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as necessary, and close the wound.
dou chancre	chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed in the division the appearances of a chancre and how one should operate with medicines, and how to avoid surgical cure. And we speak of an enlarging chancre in the marrow, and great caution is required in its treatment, and the ancients said that when chancres are in a place where they can be scraped away like those on the breast or hip, and similar places, one should remove it all at the beginning; but when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I have never seen any healed nor has anyone before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operation, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is to purge the sick person with black colic several times; then make him sweat if there is visible swelling; then prepare the sick person one good day for the operation. Then grasp your tweezers or scalpel and cut around the chancre on all sides, and remove it completely without leaving any behind. And let the blood flow freely, then squeeze the wound with your hand or some other thing, and if bleeding from the incision of an artery or vein opposes you, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat it with other dressings until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Regarding dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have previously discussed in the section the semblances of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each semblance, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is called only eclites; and one must not touch with iron in these two semblances: namely, tympanites and hipsparche, for they are deadly things.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be sharpened at both ends.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then thrust it in, but not so deeply that it can reach the intestine when it is inserted, and do not cause a cut; then look if the dropsy has entered near the intestines: thus you must make an incision of three fingers' width directly beneath on the right side; and if it is due to liver disease, let your incision be on the left side of the three fingers; and if it is due to worms, let it be on the right side, and it is not necessary that the patient lie upon the incision lest the superfluities run to that weak place; then pierce all the skin with this tool, and insert it, and raise your hand with the spatumile between the skin and the syfac as in cutting a finger's width or around it; then pierce the syfac until the spatumile reaches the empty space, which is the place of water, then draw it forth, and into that tool insert this form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	It is like a thin silver rod, and it is made of lead or light arrowhead material, and has one small hole at the tip; on one side there are three holes, two more on another side, and one on another; the head is cut like a feather, which is the form of the incision that writers use to trim feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the alembic, so when the instrument reaches the water, let it rest there. Then empty one third or half of it, for if you empty too much at that time, by chance the patient may die from the spirits leaving his weapon, or he may faint, or approach death. But empty according to its power and the indications of the patient's pulse and constitution. Then draw out the instrument and hold the water, which is retained by the heart closing the hole in the syphilis, as I have spoken about. Then you pierce according to this manner; then start the instrument again the next day if you see the patient enduring these things, and draw out a small quantity of water. Do this for several days, but guard against leaving too much water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much water there, cure it with a hot sepulture or sand bath, and often sweat or bathe in the sun, and cause him to drink; and cure it with drying medicines until it is dried up, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	"Regarding the obstruction of the instrument"
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without any opening in their penis, or with a small opening, or one that is not in the correct place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it needs to be done immediately, pierce it with a very fine spatula according to this shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the thin lead plug in the hole and tie it, holding it like this for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, remove the plug, let him urinate, and then replace it. And sometimes it may not be necessary, because the urine coming out will not leave the hole closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose wound is small, let him apply clay of lead, as we have said; it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	He who does not have the wound in its place is burned, for some are born with the wound at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating until they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because semen cannot reach the mouth of the urethra, and this is a bad condition.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And the manner of performing this operation is that the patient lies on their back, then extend the tip of the penis and cut it like the tail of a feather so that the hole falls in the middle as it should. And be careful not to cause bleeding, which happens frequently, and if it does happen, stop the bleeding with whatever stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed."
des pustules de la verge	"Regarding the pustules of the penis:"
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Many times these swellings appear on the penis, which is an ugly appearance of flesh. There are some that are malignant and others that are not. You must take them with a sharp needle and cut them out and clean them all, then place moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment on them; then treat them with diafinicon ointment until they are healed."
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the wound is malignant, foul-colored and foul-smelling, then you must apply cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it out, and if the wound is on top of the penis, with part inside the skin and part outside, then first remove the part that is inside; and when it is healed, then treat the outer part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if you treat it all together, the head of the penis may not be completely healed and blackness and corruption will come to his penis and testicles; so everything that is black and corrupted must be removed, then apply a plaster made from pomegranate peel and honey and flour, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding starts, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And the cauteries help with two conditions together: namely, for bleeding and corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you should insert or guide into it a tube of lead, so that the patient can urinate through it. And when the skin around the head of the penis is hard due to inflammation which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or due to a wound or abscess, then you must cauterize with the hair remover until the liens are untied and the head of the penis is released from all sides. And if it's difficult to separate them, then you should cauterize with the spatula slightly on the head of the penis and skin; then carefully cut between them, and put a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water there, so that it may soften again.
de la circoncision	"Regarding circumcision:"
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	"Circumcision is not the removal of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this operation by choice and especially on children, it is necessary that we do our best to make it the best and easiest operation for healing."
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	"I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience."
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	"For I have wanted the majority of masters and surgeons who perform circumcision to use a single clasp, and forceps, and a novacula; thus it was easy for the heart because there are two layers, and sometimes one cuts the top one and leaves the bottom one."
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	"Or the circumcision is double pain, and at the cleansing of the glans the point of the member is not secure; and in the cleansing of the foreskin sometimes the iron slips away and mars the work, and many times it happens that they do not need cleansing and I have seen this."
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	"Regarding the cleansing that is done with forceps along the entire length of the thread, I have found through experience that it is good because forceps cut equally well above and below."
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand, cut evenly in one single stroke; but ensure the thread is tightly wrapped around the skin. The manner of the first operation should be such that you make the child understand, if he hears, that you are only tying the thread around the stick, and then allow him to enjoy all possible ways; then hold him upright between your hands, and hide the forceps between your hands or under your feet so the child does not see them, nor any instruments. Then insert your hand up to the stick and blow into the heart, pulling it upwards until the head of the stick is inside. Then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie below at another knot; hold it with two fingers by the second knot near the wrist and thumb, and cut between the two knots, then quickly lift the heart upwards and pull out the head of the stick. Then let the blood flow freely from vein to vein, for this is what moistens; then place powder on it and on the powder a gauze glued with an egg yolk cooked undiluted with rose water, compounded with good rose oil, and leave it until the next day, and continue the treatment until he is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	"The shape of the weights for purification should be this: the two heads should be thin and sharp; they should also be as large as a hazelnut each."
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	"The error of purification is when the heart within slips during incision; therefore, you must extend it with your finger before the wound becomes inflamed; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, use tongs to do so."
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	"And if it takes three days and what is under the shaft is swollen, then leave it until the inflammation has subsided, and lightly scrape away the scab; cut as much as you can move without hurting yourself, but be careful not to damage the part of the shaft, for it will not harm him at all."
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"So treat the wound with healing powder as we have said when speaking of powders. If you cut too much and it goes upwards, it will not harm him. Treat it as we have said until it is completely healed."
dou retenement de l’urine	"On the retention of urine"
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to obstruction by stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or flesh born, or similar things, which we have discussed in the division. And if the urine is not released, and you see that the obstruction is due to a stone located at the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be made to bend over his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and let the patient lean back as much as he can. Then the neck of the bladder will be forced open for the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is released. And if it does not come forth, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using all the instruments called "syringe", of which this is the shape: and it should be made of thin, light silver, like the feather of a bird; and its tube should be one-and-a-half palms long, and fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of issuing urine is thus: you take a doubled thread, and tie at the head one pouch of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; then cut off the excess wool and place it up to the head of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis upwards towards the belly; then push the syringe forward until it touches the bladder, and when the patient feels this, then pull out the thread along with the wool pouch by pouch, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it, and make the urine flow; and repeat the syringe process until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	Here are some examples of what "des maladies de la vessie" might mean in English:
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When the skin is peeled off and blood flows into the bladder, or putrefaction has gathered there, and you see that water and medications are being distilled from it, then use all the instruments called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	She is closed, and has III openings: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see. The raised place is such that the medicine can be inserted tightly without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out, and introduced when necessary; and when you want to introduce your medicines into the bladder, put the tip of the syringe in the moisture, and draw the tube that is inside; then draw the moisture into the syringe, and then push the tube back in firmly; thus the moisture will enter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one irrigates the bladder.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher. Below there are two openings, one on each side where the rope hangs down. Then take a sheep's bladder and put into it the moisture with which you wish to irrigate the bladder. Then tie it firmly between the two breasts with a good doubled thread, and warm this moisture over the fire for a short time. Then insert the tip of the enema into the tube, then press your hand firmly on the bladder until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder. And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a round circle out of it, and pierce it evenly around. Then insert the thread firmly through these holes, then gather the circle together as one gathers a net, and put within this what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument. And do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	"de la pierre"
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	"We have already said in the section on stones and their extraction together with medicines; and we have explained the difference between stones engrained in the kidneys and all the signs, and in which stones one should operate by cutting; and in the bladder and in the penis; and I will tell you this clearly and briefly."
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	"I say that stones engrained in the bladder happen more often to children, and this is a sign that water flows from the bladder like water in its subtlety. And they perceive sand there, and the patient grasps his penis, and he feels many times, and then it hardens; and many times these are the foundation of pain. And the cure for children is easy until they are four years old, and it is very difficult for the elderly, and it is average for young people, those who are between youth and old age. And the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones."
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes obstructs seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, tilt them and move them downward so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it may rise to a high place; then have him sit between your hands, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely tilted downwards; then search for it and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in its space, quickly cut towards the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall upon touching it all around, then moisten your right index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is a fully grown youth; and insert it into his fundament, seek out the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press down on your finger and push the stone towards the opening where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	"And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch his right hand up towards the scrotum, and with his left hand remove the skin that is under the scrotum in the part where the incision is made. Then insert the spatula shaped like this:"
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	**And make between those that are between the thighs and the fundament, not in the middle but at the side of the left thigh; and it should be straight on the stone, and your two hands should always be on the fundament, and the cut of the traverse should be so that it is wide by default, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure will cause the two that are on the fundament to jump out without labor; and know that there are such stones that have angles and edges: they are difficult to pass; and there are those that are smooth, like a pebble, and rounded, from which the exit is easy.**
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	**Therefore, for those that have angles and edges, make the cut larger; and if it does not jump out, then you must extract with forceps which are also like a file at the head, so that you can grasp the stone so that it does not escape; or you put under it a subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot grasp it thus, then widen the small hole in the opening, and if blood flows out, then stop it with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, first place the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then let them flow out, and then the others if there are many.**
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be so, and a larger wound must be made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And there are two things that can happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine begins to flow from where the wound cannot heal. But nevertheless, strive to pull it out with forceps, or cut it out with pincers, piece by piece; and once you have completed your task, fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, then bandage it tightly, and place a wet cloth dipped in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water on top, to cool the hot abscess. Then bind the patient around his neck, and do not untie the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when you untie it, then wash the area very well with oil and water, then dress it with diapheconointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed."
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses and corrosions appear in the wound, and blood clots form in the bladder, causing urine to be retained and come out without warning with urine: then boil your thumb in the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder. Then wash the wound with water, honey, and salt, and help the patient in all ways that you know until he is healed. And every time you treat him, you must bind both his thighs together, and apply medicine to the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it lies in the passage of the penis and it's stuck there and urine cannot come out; then perform the treatment I mentioned earlier, cutting many times until it's freed from this cut.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tested it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	"Take one iron rod according to this shape and let it be forked at three ends stuck into one stick:"
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder; then insert the trocar into the penis gently until it reaches the stone; then turn the trocar in your hand against the stone a little at a time until you can pierce the stone on the other side; then urine will soon flow, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	But if it breaks quickly and comes out with the urine, then the patient is healed. And if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, then tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the penis at the location of the stone between the two threads, then remove it and untie the thread, and clean the wound with cold water, and treat it until it's healthy.
de la piere des femmes	"from the stone of women"
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	"It happens rarely that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does happen, its treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who reveals herself to doctors, especially when she is chaste."
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	**And the third manner is thus: On occasion one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; And the fourth manner is thus: The stone of the woman is more deeply situated than that of man, therefore one must make a deeper cut there, and great fear exists. And if you need such help, then you must take a skilled midwife, and barely can one find her, and if you do not find one, then seek a subtle caster; And present him with a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her to perform what you command concerning the inquiry into the stone; And examine very well whether the woman is virgin: Then she must put her thumb on the fundament and seek the stone; And if she finds it, then press it down with her thumb, and recommend that she put her thumb in the vulva of the patient, and feel and press her left hand strongly on the bladder.**
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut against the stone in the root of the thigh near the middle of the groin where it has moved into position, and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move your knife above or below the stone, making the first incision small; then insert the knife into the incision if you feel the stone so close to the wound that the stone can come out forth, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	and know the similitudes to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood vanquishes you, then place powdered vitriol on the wound, and let it stay there for an hour until the blood stops flowing; then return to your work until the stone is out, and have with you the instruments that I told you about in extracting stones from men to aid you in your work; and if the blood vanquishes you again, and it is from the artery that was cut, then place powder on the wound and bind it tightly with cloths and bandages, do not begin cutting again, and leave the stone alone without attempting to remove it, lest by chance the patient die; then dress the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	"And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the wound is healed, then return to your task until the stone is out."
de hernie carnouse	Hernia carnosum
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	"Pus ouse n'est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l'uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l'uef, si c'on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c'est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nous avons dit; et ceu n'avient se poc non."
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	"And the generation of this hernia is from weakness that comes to the intestines, and this matter is spread out."
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it occurs due to percussion on the joints; this moisture has many colors: either declining towards jaundice, or without redness, or black, or whitish and watery, which happens more often. These are signs of recognizing such a gathering, for if it is sac-like white as we have said, then the abscess is ripe, about the size of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper skin, then the abscess is ripe with a portion of the egg-white, and therefore it is thought to be another egg; but if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the sac-like white, one feels it well. Therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, squeeze the entire contents into a square glass, as shown above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	"So according to what comes after the probe, judge what is inside."
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we operate with iron (i.e., cauterize), the patient must be in good health according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then have him lie on his back, upon something a little high, and put many cloths underneath him. Then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the joint of the heart. Then take the spatula lightly, and cut the skin of the joints among the long hairs down to the flesh, and let your incision be straight, dividing the skin of the joints up to the sac-like white, and scratch it subtly according to your strength; then pierce the sac full of water with a large hole, and extract all the water, and then put on your bandages, and stretch the sac upwards. And do not touch the joint of the heart, but only the sac; cut everything away or in pieces subtly from it, that if you do not cut it well, the water will return. And if the egg should fall out during your operation, put it back in its place when you have finished the operation on the sac. Then sew up the two leaves of the joint of the heart with a suture, then cure it as other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	"And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are suspended there, preventing bleeding; then cut the intestines along their entire length and remove the egg, and heal it as we have said."
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if water is gathered in two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; cut the other part equally as you did the first one, then squeeze out the blood, and put clean linen moistened with rose oil on the wound; and place another piece of linen moistened in wine and oil over both wounds, and cover them with doubled cloths, and bind it all according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and fill them with wool wadding according to this form and sew them together at the waist of the breeches, and one of the heads should be placed on the buttocks up to the back, and the other at the wrist area; and the other two ends are placed over the two angles, and all the restraint should be assembled in the loop of the breeches. And sometimes this branch is medicated with cautery instead of iron cutting, and it is that you take one subtle cautery knife, and cut the skin of the wounds, and heat it as we have said, so that the white spongy substance containing water is exposed; then take the cautery in this form, and pierce that sponge with incisions, and burn it with this subtle hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And prune it in all ways that you can, until you strip it bare; and ensure that the fire does not touch the eye; and know that this work is more sound; and move carefully to avoid bleeding, and moisturize the cut surfaces; and if anything goes contrary to you, whether a boil bursts or bleeding occurs or some other thing, then treat what goes contrary to you, according to what is said beforehand.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this procedure due to its horrifying nature, then prepare for perforation, as I instruct you. And when you are certain through the signs that we have said that running water is present, then seat the patient on a raised chair; pierce the boil at its lower part with a wide spatula, and insert the perforation tool along the length of the body; make the opening large enough so that all the water flows freely. Then place cotton on the site and tie it, allowing the remaining water to flow out, then treat until the wound is healed. And if the white cloth does not allow the water to exit from the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used for treating hydrocele, whose form is shown beforehand. Widen the opening of the wound, and know that the water returns, assembling again after six months or thereabouts. And when it assembles as before, so shall the patient pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the boil on the buttocks
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the cutting of this vein there is fear and many dispositions [positions], therefore it seems to me that it would be better if one leaves it alone; and I will tell you about its workings and similar things regarding the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	"I say therefore that many boils come on the body, and especially on the intestines; and this happens in many cases."
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to be known that this abscess comes from an acid and sharp humoral imbalance, spread through the joints or caused by injury; its color matches that of the body's skin; it causes no pain but is serious nonetheless. Sometimes there are multiple abscesses that are pale and red, with a foul smell, which can also come from an arterial issue or venous inflammation.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an artery, it can be recognized by the hot and hard nature of the abscess when pressed between two fingers; you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	An abscess caused by venous inflammation is recognized by its softness upon touching with two fingers; you can safely make an incision here and on other similar areas. First, cut around the edges of the joint, then raise the skin upwards, expose the white fat beneath, and remove the suspending ligament from all sides of the egg [ovary].
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already hard with these new-born chicks, then you must pull out the egg and the chick; and if it is aired on the shaf or in the one that is inside the vessels, then you must remove all of this tension, and round off the chick.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the origin of the flesh is at the back, you must cut it all away, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are complete, apply linen soaked in rose oil and wine to the wound, then dress it with other dressings until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the boil on the buttocks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a tumor covered by a growth resembling a boil, with softening of the flesh, and the patient cries out when touched; and the treatment for this illness is almost as frightening as the one mentioned before, nevertheless we will tell you its workings according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then hang the suspensory ligaments of the testes down onto your two fingers, close to the penis, and tie them with a thread, stretching them out well. Then cut through the skin over the vessels with a broad, sharp scalpel, exposing them, and then scrape away from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries from the temples. Then insert a needle with a double thread where the vein emerged first, and tie it at the first point where the vein appeared, and tie it again at the other end. Then cut through the middle correctly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moistures. Then dress the wound as you would others where a bow is inserted, so that no vessel falls which nourishes one of the testicles; for by this there comes no harm, and if there is veining in all the vessels, then you must draw the testicles from all the vessels, so that the scrotum does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they become dry and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the nose
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The events of this disease occur through the division that comes from the bladder, or the stretching over the abdomen in the angle region, because of which the intestines descend from that breach to one of the hips; and this breach is either from the bladder or from the stretching of it, and these two types come from many causes: such as a fall, a leap, a blow, lifting heavy weights, and similar things; and the sign when it's from the stretching of the bladder, is that it happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; and the abscess is even up to its depth, because the bladder presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign when it is a cut in the thigh is that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various visible swellings under the skin, which is due to the leakage of intestines and blood from the wound in the thigh
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	Sometimes the rings are torn along with the intestines, which are retained inside and cause great suffering for the sick person, especially when they are pressed upon
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cases of iron wounds, it is necessary to avoid them
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	The manner of this operation is that you command the patient to insert their intestines with their hand into the wound if it can be reached; then press on their neck between your hands and lift their hips; then stretch out the heart above and cut all the skin from the long hip bones; then insert the scissors of the waist's ring according to what you need to open the wound, and let them be such that the bone can come out; then peel back the bladder which is underneath the skin of the hip bones until the white hard bladder is exposed on all sides; then put your right index finger into that which leads to the hip bone, in that which is between the white bladder which is under the skin of the testicle and between the second bladder, and separate that which is behind the testicle and between the second bladder; and then move with your right hand inside the hip bones and stretch out the white bladder upwards with your left hand, and lift the testicle together with all the bladder towards the waist; and command the assistant to stretch out the testicle upwards and loosen that which is against behind the attachment; and search with your two hands if there is any intestine wrapped around the hard white bladder, and if you find anything, put it back into the abdomen underneath; then take a needle which has one thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it in the rear part of the bladder which is after the hip bones, after the waist, then cut the heads that appear from the threads until there are four threads; then tie them together in the manner of a cross, and tie the bladder with it, as we have said before, with a strong tie of two parts; then wrap the heads of the threads and tie them firmly with two ties so that no vessels which nourish it can enter there where pus may come; and put back the tie according to the first tie long two fingers from it, and after these two ties leave some of the bladder which is underneath the hip bones in the palm of your hand; and after everything else according to the roundness that the testicle carries; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the hip bones until the blood flows out, and the bowel as we have said before; then bring moistened wool in oil and put it on the wounds, and bring the tie that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes cauterize the white flesh that we have mentioned after the incision, for fear of bleeding
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times and let the lien fall through it; and if it delays in falling, then raise with hot water, and put on what we have said until it falls; then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Hernia carnosum
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I never saw anyone daring to perform the cure by iron
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done like the branch which is together with the vise, in such a manner that you tie the vessels after the incision, lightly below upwards; then cut into it, and treat the abscess from what opens until the vessels fall; and cure it as we have said until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the groin as we have said, and opens up the site; and let no part of the intestines slip out through the wound, and if some do slip out it is little matter, and repair them at once; but even so if it remains too long in this state the wound becomes inflamed or syphacated until the intestines slip out; and this happens by the extension of the syphac which is in the groin as we have said, for it stretches then softens and swells the site opens up; and its cure is by cautery as we have before said; but sometimes it is cured by iron in this way: And let the patient lie often on his back between your hands, then cut into the swollen site of the rupture with a width according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the syphac which is under the skin that is affected, then take the reed and place it over the opening of the syphac; and press it firmly down on the lower abdomen, then sew up both openings of the syphac upon the head of the reed, sewing each one separately; then extract the head of the reed, and do not cut into the syphac or extend the wound or anything else, as I have taught you in the cure of the rupture of the intestines; then cure it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse and dress the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sinew is contracted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is more effective at this point and closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	Regarding the softening of the skin around the anus
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the anus in some men becomes softened due to the softening of the flesh that is inside, and it is unpleasant to see. And when one wants to treat it, let the patient lie on his back, and cut away the softened skin from the natural skin. Then join the two lips together with a single stitch, and if you wish, sew up the excess softened skin with three or four firm stitches. Then cut between the stitches and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the threads.
dou chastrement	Regarding castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	And know that castration is forbidden by our law, and therefore I would not wish to speak of it in this book; however, there are two reasons why some information about it may be necessary: one is so that the physician can respond when asked about it and its treatment; and the other is because we often have need of the castration of certain beasts to aid us, such as of goats and sheep and dogs and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: either by traction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method that we use traction, make the beast sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and relaxed; then grasp them with your hand so that they are replaced and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For castration by cutting: you must restrain the beast, and press the skin of the scrotum with your left hand, then tie the suspensiony ligament, and cut each testicle once after you have well scraped them; leave a little bit of the sheath and the subtle sheath that is over the vessels; and this method of castration is safer than that done by traction, because in traction some part of the testicles may remain, causing the beast to desire lust; then dress the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermafroditism comes in two ways among men: one way is that between the two testicles opens also like the figure of a woman's nature, where there is hair, and sometimes it leaks urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, who have on their pubic region both a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for both men and women is that you cut away all the attached skin and treat it like other wounds; in the second manner, for those men whose urine leaks through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Regarding hemorrhoids：
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is an attached skin on the natural part, as long as it is too unsightly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you shave the excess skin of the tentigene with your hand or with scissors, and cut it lightly; and do not go too deep lest blood flow, then treat the wound with other remedies until it heals. And there is another skin that grows at the mouth of the womb, and the anus, and sometimes jumps out furiously, and resembles a cow's disease, which is why the ancients called it "cow's illness".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must cut it, as we have said regarding the tenting procedure, and care for it until it is healthy.
de erratique	Of the erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	An error is when the nature of the woman's body is not pierced, or if the opening is small; it is either natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has occurred there; or it is caused by tissue joined together, either thin or thick skin, and is located deep in the womb, or on the sides, below, or wherever it may be; it prevents conception, childbirth, and sometimes the flow of menstrual blood; and its recognition comes from examining the vulva.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling is near the surface, then search with your fingers or a probe.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is thin skin and close to the surface, then hurry up and do this: put your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then press the two lips firmly until the thin skin is taut and covers the swelling; then take linen, moistened in oil, and place it on the spot, and let the woman rest each day so that it cannot heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the shoulder blade is hard and thick, you must shave it like a laurel leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is flesh-born, suspend it with a plaster and shave it; and have medicines that stop blood flow, such as aloe, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with egg white. Then apply a wide cloth bandage so that the wound cannot heal. And do this repeatedly until it is healed. Then dress it with other remedies until it is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when flesh comes out in the wound, it must be shaved in this manner, unless it's an inflamed abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the inflamed abscess that is in the wound, one should not apply fire.
des emorroides	**Hemorrhoids:** Hemorrhoids are varicose veins inside or outside the anus; they appear as small lumps like bunches of grapes; some are internal and invisible from without, while others are external; they cause pain when defecating or sitting down; they can cause blood to flow freely during defecation or after, or only stain the toilet paper; sometimes they prolapse and come out at defecation; they are caused by constipation due to a bad diet, heavy lifting, or frequent diarrhea. The cure for them is to avoid their causes: eat healthy food that does not cause constipation, drink plenty of water, exercise regularly, do not lift heavy objects unnecessarily, and use ointments to relieve pain and inflammation. For internal hemorrhoids, surgery may be necessary if they are large or causing significant symptoms. Otherwise, rubber band ligation, sclerotherapy, or infrared coagulation can be used to treat them. For external hemorrhoids, warm sitz baths, witch hazel pads, and over-the-counter creams can provide relief. In severe cases, surgery may be necessary.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are the openings of veins which usually do not bleed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard; and we have already spoken in the division about their similarities, signs, and now I will say those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are deeply embedded in the flesh, and are not visible to the touch, then iron treatment is not applicable.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the anus, which one can feel, those are the ones that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you must place the woman in a cold house, then stretch open the mouth of the anus with forceps, grasp it with the pincers at its root, then sprinkle medicinal powders that constrain blood flow, such as acacia and dragon's blood and frankincense and similar substances; then hold her feet against the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water. If bleeding starts, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and gall nuts and similar things. Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster to apply to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if she stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, apply cupping glasses to the back and breasts without injuring; then take linen, and soak it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply to the location.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the boil is ripe, apply ointment to the location until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a bitter apple, so it must be cut as I have said before; and then care for it until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	**Abscesses of the Rectum:** Abscesses of the rectum are localized collections of pus that can develop due to infection or injury to the tissues of the anorectal area. Symptoms may include pain, swelling, redness, warmth, and fever. Treatment typically involves incision and drainage of the abscess under local anesthesia to relieve pressure and allow the pus to drain out. This procedure is usually performed by a surgeon or colorectal specialist. If the abscess is deep-seated or associated with significant inflammation, the patient may require intravenous antibiotics to fight infection and prevent it from spreading. In some cases, a seton (a loop of suture material) may be placed into the abscess cavity to allow for ongoing drainage over time. It's important to note that untreated abscesses can rupture spontaneously, causing severe pain and potentially leading to serious complications such as sepsis or fistula formation. Therefore, prompt medical attention is crucial for proper diagnosis and treatment.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of boils come in the flesh, such as cancer and stone boil, herpes and erysipelas and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot boil, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I must discuss in this treatise the hot boil that comes on the flesh, which is not one of those boils that grow over; and if you wish to know how to work with iron, look first whether the boil is full at its beginning, hot and feverish, and turns red when viewed.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not rush to pierce [the skin], but make the hole so large that the pain is appeased. Then seat the patient on a chair, with two small chairs where they can lean back and support their back and assemble their feet against the thigh; and let their thighs be spread wide, and place their arms under their knees, and bind them tightly with a good binding. Then suck the bag towards the right side, and bring forth the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the marrow, whose form comes later; and it is necessary that when you prepare this instrument, you first insert the rod to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not wound the patient. And if the instrument is too large, then cover the depth of the marrow with rags, so that the instrument does not hurt. And it is necessary that they place the funnel of the instrument above, and wet the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and it is cut with a gentle hand, then it is necessary to cover it at the head, at the spatula's edge; and when the bowels are empty, then you must place in the wound wet bandages in rose oil or dry green oil; and put the bandage far from the wound at the bottom of the marrow, and put behind it on the marrow and on the linen cloth well-washed in water where mallow is cooked; then after two days of suitable ointment, until it is healed; and sometimes they lift the marrow and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then with water where lily roots and long coltsfoot are cooked; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is located in the marrow, then you must refrain from cauterizing with fire, but treat it as we have said in the section on dislocations.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary first that the midwife knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the sign is when you see the woman hurry forward, and desires to smell the air: then the child hastens to come out forthwith; then know thou that this birth is according to nature's figure, and the afterbirth is under its head, and the secondine with it; and when thou seest these signs, then press her belly gently so that the child comes forth quickly; for when it descends upon its head, then is the secondine with it, and the womb is cleansed of its superfluities by good cleansing; and he who comes otherwise comes not naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For sometimes it comes upon its feet, and the body or head comes forth first, and the hands, or it comes upon its belly, sometimes, and is turned perhaps upon its neck, and in other evil figures; therefore it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in these things, and guard against error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes forth naturally upon its head and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool or let women hold her up; and raise her nature with oil of almonds or fennel cooked, and then place the midwife between her thighs the little spatula, whose form is as follows:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and break the amniotic sac, and cut with its nail until the moisture inside comes out; and press on the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then one must administer a clyster to the woman made of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil; then let her sneeze and yawn, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will be born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out first, then you must gently push them back bit by bit; and if they cannot be put back in, then place the woman on a seat, and raise her feet up high; then tilt the seat towards the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall during the tilting; and if the hands still cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the joint that is mentioned here, and extract the child, and realign it properly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the delivery of a child onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes onto its feet, one must place it upright; then turn it gently and gently until it is even; then take one foot and stretch it gently
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it jumps up to the hips, order it to grasp, and make it sneeze with condition; then jump forth if God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if there is no cautery as we have said, then it should be turned little by little until it matches its natural shape
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it becomes easy
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take musk in old wine and oil of sesame, and melted gum, grind all together in one mortar; put this ointment on the woman's nature and let her sit in warm water up to below the ribs; and when she is moistened below, place a collar of myrrh around her and put it beneath her, leaving it for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for now the child will leap forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	"of the child's exit onto its knees"
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child arrives in this form, then let the midwife place her hands softly and gently; then support him on his neck, and let his feet hang down, and let him lie on the bed; and fold his hands softly and gently, and then place his hands on his belly, and remove the cushions from below, so that he may be positioned correctly. And if the child does not slip out, then take his feet and move them forcefully, then move his belly upwards, then place your hands there; and wipe the child softly and gently; and instruct the woman to press down until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	"One hand comes out during the birth of the child"
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	If you cannot bring the hand back into position: if she cannot be brought up, then make the woman get up and walk around; if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and forcefully raise her legs; then apply the muscilage that I have described; and if she does not give birth, then seat her on a chair, and study how to bring the hand back into position; and wipe the child according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, and tell her to press down until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	"At the moment of birth, with its hands spread wide, facing its mother's back."
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the patient grasp their hand, then turn it gradually and gently; and when it is even, so place on it the musky nature of althea and oil, as we have said, then tell them to move it gradually; and when you have done this, let her sit on the seat, and tell her to sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	"This same manner is used for the afterbirth."
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When heat comes upon the amniotic sac in this manner throughout the secondine, then cut the amniotic sac with your thumbnail until the moisture is emptied; and if the child lies on its face and neck, then cut it from behind so that it is not retained, and the child dies. Then put the child inside until you have placed it correctly, and tell the woman to push a few times: then it will come out easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	"Regarding the birth of twins:"
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	"It is well known that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or even four; this is not a strange thing and happens infrequently."
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and do not live, if they have no name; I know these ones, which multiply, and are desired by the syphac who devours them, which is attached to the navel; and sometimes they come out naturally just like a tooth, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out crying, treat them as we have said, and let the physician be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what she does; and do thus as it is worth moving for health.
de plusors enfans	"Regarding multiple births:"
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb with one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or even more, and all are formed into the shape of a child according to the measurement of the wise physician's glory. And it is necessary for the physician to know all this, for similar things have happened before; so act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	Regarding a stillborn child:
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And when you treat the woman with the dead child in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained by necessity to act with your hands; then you must know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fears death. Then the woman should be propped up on her back, with her hips inclined downwards and her legs raised. And the assistant should tie her thighs with two cloths, or she should be tied to the bed so that she is not treated while descending the child. Then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with althea and fenugreek and linseed. Then the physician should anoint his hands with these oils and muscillaages. Then insert them into the womb gently, then move to where it fits best for the child to descend on its head. And make sure the child is properly positioned before inserting the hook in its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or near the navel or near the sides. If the descent is on its feet, insert the hook or crochet and into the middle of the sides. And it is necessary to hold the hook in your right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of your left hand, and insert it gently with all your hand, and insert the hook into any of these places that we have said until the thing is empty.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then stick one against the other, or use three if necessary, so that the extraction is even; then stretch them evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that movement comes out, and let the forceps' teeth grip for holding.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some part remains, then smear some of its dough with oil and place the hands in that part, and pull the other part; and if none remains, then place this forceps higher up and do so until all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be pulled back due to tension, then you must wrap it with a cloth until all comes out; then cut at the joint of the sole or at the elbow, and do likewise for the other hand.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and tight at the opening, or has a sharp point assembled on top, then you must place the spatula spinous between your hands, split open the top, and remove the pointed bone; or you can round it with the tool called 'almidach,' whose shape comes with the tools in the chapter that follows this one; and do likewise if the child has a large head naturally; and then pull out the bones with forceps, and if the head does not come out despite being pulled strongly, cut it open until the moisture at the foot of the opening comes out; and if it cannot come out, cut it piece by piece as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce there until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	"And if the child is on its feet, traction will be light, and the alignment of the mouth of the marrow will be easy."
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is stuck in the belly or breast, then you must draw it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and cut into the belly or breast until the moisture that is there escapes; and if the other members are removed but the head remains, then place your hand deep into the marrow, and pull until you reach the mouth of the marrow; then insert one or two fingers, and pull it out; and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, then you must not work there, rather moisten it with moist and fatty substances; and apply plasters, and soak in softening and moistening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is lying on its side and you cannot make it lie flat, then treat it as we have said for a living child; and if one cannot do so, then pull it out piece by piece, and leave no part of the afterbirth behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And once you have done this, if the patient suffers from abscesses as we have mentioned that come on the skin, and if there is an outflow of blood, then it should be placed in hot water that has been restrained, and other treatments applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	"I saw a woman whose child had been bitten in the abdomen by one mouse, then another mouse came and bit the other."
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	"After many days, an abscess formed on her cheekbone and swelled so much that it opened up, causing great pain."
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	"I was called to treat her, but after thinking about it for some time, I could not heal the wound."
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	"I applied a poultice with strong drawing power and out came one bone, then after a few days another."
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	"I was greatly amazed at this because the abdomen has no bones."
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	"So I thought it must be the bones of a dead fetus."
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I sought the wound, and drew out many bones until the woman was much better. And the woman lived for a long time like this, and sometimes a little bowels came out from there; and I recorded this chapter because whenever the master finds something strange, he knows how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	"on bringing the hip joint back into place"
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the pressure bandage, with which one wraps the books; and at two turns around the two heads of the two ribs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horn should be more delicate than the restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the wood should be two fingers wide, and its edge one finger thick, and one and a half palms long. And between the two joints there should be two attachments of this same wood, which are fastened at both ends with half a palm's length or a little more; and these two attachments are placed in the mouth of the wound to open it when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more delicate and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling tongs; and have two sockets at both ends, each a palm's length and two fingers wide. When you wish to open the mouth with the entire instrument, cause the woman to sit on the bed, her feet dangling and legs spread apart. Then insert both sockets together into the mouth, holding the head of the instrument beneath her thighs. Open your hand around the entire instrument, as you would with tongs evenly, according to how much you wish to open the mouth of the speculum.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	"These instruments are all mounted and have multiple similar forms. And when the master has prepared them, he who operates is faster in his work, and higher in esteem among men for his skill."
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	"Therefore do not disregard the instrument until you have prepared it, for its usefulness is not negligible."
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second child is retained during labor, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold her breath and then cause her to sneeze using condis. Hold your hands over her mouth and nose; if she expels something, all is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this is not the case, then take a pot, and make a hole in its lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calamint, rue, anise, camomille, cassialigne, and centory; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in the pot with water over the fire. Then put one end of a tube into the hole of the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the marrow, and hold it until the vapors enter the marrow. Then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	"If the midwife acts quickly,"
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment and is not yet healed, command the woman to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in musk of almonds, and then put it into nature, and seek the ovary. And when she has found it, grasp it gently and stretch it out little by little, straightly, so that the marrow does not fall out during extraction; but it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then pull; thus it will come forth and be freed.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the womb is too narrow, we have spoken of the cure for sneezing and fumigation with herbs; but if it does not improve from all that we have said, then be sure that you do not use the catheter; but what should be done at the mouth of the womb is to tie it to the woman's hip, then perform a suppository with terapharmacon ointment. She will recover and resume her activities, but even so, when she recovers there may still come forth an unpleasant odor in the stomach and head, which causes discomfort to the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	"Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be applied at this time. Many of the ancients have tried fumigations with watercress and dried figs."
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	"The shape of the instrument used for fumigation of the woman during childbirth and delivery is as follows:"
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it resembles in appearance a dog's head. The subtlest part of its nature is placed on the fire, and the broad heads are laid upon the coals; let the fumigation be performed over the hot charcoal, until the resin is completely exhausted, then begin another.
de percier lou fondement	"to pierce the anus"
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born with the fundament not pierced, but blocked by a subtle sybac. Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this sybac with her thumb and not to touch it with the sharp point of a spatula, guarding that she does not hurt it. Then place on wet linen soaked in wine and oil, then apply ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	"And if you suspect that it has not healed, insert a silver tube into the hole and leave it there for several days. It should be removed when the child is ready to go to its room."
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	"Sometimes this obstruction can be caused by a sudden eruption or boil. In such cases, the eruption should be opened and treated as described for the silver tube."
de la fistule dou fondement	"of a fistula of the anus"
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that originate beneath the anus are nodose, and growths that come around the anus or in the space of both buttocks indicate one fistula or several; and when this nodosity is ancient, it opens, and abundant white or clear mucus flows out, sometimes persistently; these fistulas are recognized by those who experience evacuation or wind during defecation by the patient, and occasionally one appears suddenly.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	"And there are fistulas that penetrate all the way to the bladder and halfway up the penis. Some reach as far as the hip joint, and others reach as far as the thighbone."
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one recognizes a persistent fistula at the anus, not a non-persistent one; and it is that you place your two index fingers on the anus, and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, then insert a thin reed of brass or horsehair until you feel the reed or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, nor does any evacuation or wind or worm come from the opening, as we have said: know that it does not go through; so hasten to heal.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	"And when a fistula extends all the way to the bladder or the urethra, urine flows out of it and cannot be stopped with medications."
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the coming tent is up to that place; if there is no tortuosity and the invention of pain around it, then it is that it has gone already astray, and neither medicine nor sudden ointment is worth anything in these Persian fistulas; and in these, there is no cure but labor, and vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In that which is not Persian and not ancient, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have experienced, and it is necessary that the patient lies on their back in your hands; lift their legs up to their thighs, incline their thighs towards their belly; then insert a tent of brass, or lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you must insert your two index fingers there, if now you sense that the tent has pierced it; and if uncovered where you sense between your thumb the sciatic nerve or the flesh, then know that it is Persian; so do not labor on it unless you can heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	All the time it is said that one can heal certain ones, but this happens little; and the aid that is made there, so it is that one heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it is said before; and puts it all hot into the fistula until it reaches the fundament; and do this twice or three times, until you know that these broken-down tissues are burned, which resemble a feather; and then the cure with soft bandages smeared in butter, until this tissue comes off, then the cure with ointment between skin and flesh.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is healed thus, all the better.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this one cannot be healed otherwise; and if the bandage enters but does not reach the fundus that is at the fundament, and there is a thick covering of flesh or skin between your two fingers and the bandage, and you see the fistula as it comes out from under the heart cover; then cut off from the beginning of the fistula, and immediately put in the bandage beforehand, and afterwards use the cautery until it reaches the end of the bandage; and the bandage will be delivered and will fall away; then remove those broken-down tissues that resemble a feather, and nothing will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	"If the skin becomes inflamed, and cracks between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or strong medicine."
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Because the fire cautery combines two things: namely, the burning of adjacent flesh and the drying out of blood and moisture. Then treat wet wounds with burdock or ground bramble until the place becomes empty; and scrape away burned flesh from the wound. Then dress the wound with sudden ointments on hard skin, and these are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	"For when it is thus restored, it will be healed and not return again."
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	"And if the fistula comes right up from the fundament but is distant from the body, push your thumb into the fundament and feel with it."
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel tension in the wound, and between two surfaces there is skin or fascia or flesh where it is about to burst, then apply fire cautery as we have said, or cut down to the bottom. If you cannot do this, put dressings on it and treat it as before; but do not cut too deeply lest you cut the tissue that holds the fundament, and cause unwanted discharges there. Then treat it as we have said. Perhaps it will heal without further intervention, otherwise remove that covering with a tent or other suitable instrument. Then cleanse the damaged flesh in the wound as much as possible, then study how to restore the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament; thus it will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: when you insert the tube into the fistula and it is located on the side near the foundation under the skin, take a pierced tube at its head according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	"And thread two turns of thread onto it, then insert the tent all the way down to its tip into the fistula."
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it pierces into the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that hole, so that you place your thumb on the foundation; and pull the head of the thread, and bring together the two heads, and tie them together, leaving it for one or two days. And sometimes tighten it again until the threads cut through those tissues that are between them and fall off; then dress the wound until it is healed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	"If the fistula does not open on its own, then make an incision in any way that you can, if it is not too deep."
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"For one should not cut too deeply for the sake of making a hole and then dress it as we have described until it is healed."
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spatula used for opening a fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting, but not sharp on the other side, so that it does not cut what should not be cut, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	"hemorrhoids"
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorroids come in two ways: those that are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, which often bleed, and there can be one or more. Those that are outside have little moisture, and contain a little yellow water or a little blood, with the color of skin. The cure for those who have them inside the fundament is to instruct the patient to strain themselves while walking in rooms until the fundament emits them, and then grasp them; then hurry up, and grab them with forceps, or hold them with your thumbnail, then cut them at their roots. And if the thumbnail cannot hold them because of their moisture, take them with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamlet, and pull them out with two fingers, then cut them, and apply some warm powders instead of cauterizing; or cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then cure them with other remedies until they are clean. And if the fundament cannot emit them, then administer to the patient a biting and harsh enema to wash what is inside the fundament so that it can come out openly. When the patient strains themselves, and if the threads are outside the fundament, then the cure is easy; it is only necessary to grasp them with thumbnail or forceps, cut them, then cure them as we have said, until they are clean, and avoid incision with a knife.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you stitch according to this manner: take one twisted thread, and place it in a needle, then draw the thread upwards and make the needle pierce through on the other side, and turn both ends of the thread beneath the needle, and let them be wide; and pull the thread tightly, then tie the knot, and remove the needle, and do so with all the others, leaving one to correct the excess blood. Then place a warm oiled cloth or cerate over the wound, and have the patient rest; and then leave it until it closes, and once they are closed, cure them with ointment and other treatment until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	"on the drying of fistulas in the fundament"
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	"Sometimes there is a drying up of fistulas in the intestines due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine no longer helps;"
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must scrape off the scurf from the point of a scalpel or your nail without letting it moisten. Then treat it until it is sound as it should be. And if it cannot be made sound, then recommence scraping more forcefully than before until it is entirely clean and scraped. Then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	fever
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants are tiny creatures that crawl throughout the body; sometimes they are found frozen, and their bite feels like death due to trembling, spreading throughout the entire body, more so in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	To cure this, take a reed from an ostrich feather or a strongulture's feather, and place it on the trembling spot until the circle encompasses the entire tremor. Then twist your hand around the reed, encompassing the tremor entirely, and push it deep inside to extract the tremor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	"And if you see this, do so with a cane of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and pointed above:"
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	"However, do not pierce too deeply to hold the two together and apply pressure. And if you see this, cauterize the trembling, as it is said in front or in the chapter on cautery."
de la forme dou clistere	"of the form of the enema"
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	"No one ever makes an enema of silver or copper, or melted brass or lead; and no one ever makes them of these small and large instruments, according to which they are ordered."
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	"Therefore, those that should be used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small."
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	"The form of the small and large enema is as follows, where the belly is tied according to this manner:"
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a blockage or the belly is tied up, as you can see, with holes pierced inside it; and on one side there are two holes, and on the other one; and the belly is where medicines are placed in an animal bladder or parchment skin, pierced all around with small holes, each hole having a space of one finger-width between them. Then insert strong threads made from twisted hair into these holes, crossing them like an 'X' or winding them around, and assemble the belly like a goat's stomach. And when the medicine is inside, tie it closed with a strong string using the instrument beforehand, then administer the enema; this is the form of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicament not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or dove's fat, or something similar, then insert it gently; then the minister presses it with both hands together until it is completely inserted, then extract the clyster, and the patient lifts their legs to the bed, and if the medicament wishes to exit, so stretch it as much as one can; and if they lie awake all night, so there is greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you perform an enema on someone with diarrhea and the medication comes out quickly, then start it again until it is finished."
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, so let the clyster be as subtle as for an infant; and this is the form of the subtle clyster upon which the skin should be restrained:
des plaies	"wounds."
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	"We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medications, according to their completion."
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to where the wounds are made, and what they are made from."
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by cutting with stone or sword and knife, or lance or club or arrow, or similar things; or those that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck or head or thigh or belly or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for the remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it's from an impact of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the formation of a hot boil: then make a poultice on the cephalic side immediately if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the poultice be contrary to the wounded part; and empty the patient's excess of wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not want poultice, then thin out his diet, and let him drink no wine, nor eat flesh; and put on the wound, if a hot boil comes there, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in strictive wine. And if there is no hot boil, then put powder on the wound, all its blood fresh, and it is not moved by the air, which I will say later; and if the ars has moved it, then put on some ointments until it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	"And if the wound is large, like a cut from a sword or similar objects, and the lips cannot be brought together by force, then bring them together by stitching, as I will tell you about in the treatment of abdominal wounds."
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is open and gaping and barely adhering to the bone, cut it; then treat the wound with medicine, replace hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods like testicles and cooked wheat, also poultry and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rotten skin and it is not on the bone, cut out all the rot, apply fire, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stanched by medicines without cutting, seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	"And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: you should put in this powder that welds before the air has moved it."
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The method of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, grind it finely, apply the powder to the wound, bind it firmly until it draws well and joins with all its blood; then tie it well and leave it without removing it until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	"Sometimes this can also be done with quicklime alone when incense and dragon's blood are not available, but only if the air has not moved the wound."
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved, especially in summer, do not apply this powder but instead use some digested ointments or poultices made from barley flour and honey mixed with water until it yields; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if bone fragments come with the wound and it is small, extract them using fine forceps; I will tell you about head fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	"Of the wound on the neck"
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	"If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, except when the nerve of the neck or an artery is cut."
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave it alone and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retreat; do not apply anything cold to the wound, as nerve substance is cold, and its continuation is with the brain which is the highest member; but let the medicine be warm, such as hot water mixed with rose oil, and boiled cucumbers in soft water, and other warm stones ground in this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the wound is large, then stitch it up with thread and bind it with bandages until it heals."
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and the blood has gathered and filled it, then pierce it lower; and if an artery is cut, and blood flows freely, then drain it, bind it, cauterize it if necessary. And if the spine of the neck or the heart is wounded, keep in mind where the food goes, then lift the heart off the windpipe, not touching the throat but resetting it according to its natural shape; and then constrain carefully, leave for some days, then cure with drying ointments until it is healed. And if the wound has impressed upon the bone, cleanse it. And if there are bone fragments, remove them all if you can, those that cannot be had, let them stay until the wound putrefies and become drained and dressed; and if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	"And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, cure it as I have said in its chapter."
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	"Regarding wounds from spears or daggers,"
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it's a wound from a lance or dagger, and the wound is deep, observe if wind comes out of the wound when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal. But if it is not deep, and all its blood is fresh, do not put powder on it in the first hour, nor tie it up so that no air enters deeply and reaches the heart, causing death to the patient; but apply attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to suck out moisture, and let the patient lie on the wound for three days, or four, or more; then there will be no spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart, nor constraint of breathing. And when you see good dispositions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Then treat it with dressings and other treatments until it is healed. And if it cannot heal nor close up, then know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, whether on the front or back, then treat what is before you; if it's large, stitch it; if it's small, use powder. And if it's close to the bone and has cut pieces, clean the wound and dress it with hot compresses if they are severed; and if they aren't severed, let the wound fester until it softens for extraction; and judge other wounds on other limbs as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	"Regarding rupture of the abdomen"
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And the ruptures of the belly are large and medium and small. Sometimes in a large wound, some intestine or part of it sticks out, making entry difficult; stitching is more painful, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because you can push the intestines back more easily with your fingers if you don't stitch them carefully. Also know that there are four ways to close a belly wound: two common stitches are used for closing the belly wound, and two other stitches specific to other wounds of the body are also used. However, those used for the belly wound are more appropriate, each of which I will describe.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestines has been pierced, it is difficult to reposition, this can be done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen with cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, heat it in this manner: soak a sponge or one clean cloth in hot water only, or cook in boiling water cinnamon and cumin and spikenard, and warm the intestines until the swelling has gone away; and sometimes do this with astringent wine, and also use a plaster to help reduce inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling diminishing, then moisten the intestines with water in which celery and mallows have been cooked, for by this means the entrance is enlarged a little; and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision into the wound using the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is that one must not cut without great necessity; and this is the instrument for cutting: so cut within the curvature and do not go beyond, as shown here:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines protrude outwards, then put them back according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power, for this is useful.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is located below the belly, then have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head. And if it is located below the belly, then raise the head and breast higher than the lower parts. Similarly, if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, make sure that the wounded part is raised higher than the other. And thus you should arrange this for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what you are equipped with. Then have between your hands one skilled assistant who will take all the rupture in their hand, and bring together the lips. And this is the common way of suturing: take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound. Then leave two inches from the head of the wound, and insert a needle with a strong thread. Pierce both layers of skin with both layers of sinew beneath it until you pierce them completely, then bring together all four edges together. Then tie a double thread around the needle on both sides, then bring together both edges of the wound neatly, and leave two inches, and insert another needle. Then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and continue this process according to what is needed with needles until the whole wound is closed. And the needles should be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, for too fine they cut all the flesh, and too thick will not penetrate well: therefore they must be medium-sized. Do not insert the needles too deep into the flesh and skin lest they tear open the wound before it is healed. Then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient while sleeping, and put tents or bandages over the needle holes to keep them in place until the wound is healed. This method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for one needle or two may suffice. The second way of suturing is common: bring together both layers of skin and both layers of sinew together with a needle that has a medium-strong thread. When you have pierced all these edges together, then draw the needle back to where you began, in the manner that cloth is sewn. And put between each stitch the thickness of a finger's width. This stitching is suitable for men, and I once sewed up a wound on a man's belly which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and his intestines were protruding out two palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I reset the intestines for him after he had been feverish for 24 hours, and the wound healed up to the 15th day, which I cleaned, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the doctors had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle; and I did not dress the wound with any ointment, because there were none available where I was, nor any medicines; and I only put old cotton on the wound twice a day, washing it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching: Take the needle and insert it from the outer part towards the inner until it pierces through to the other side. When it has pierced straight through the heart, then place the thread on top where you inserted the needle and make it pierce through from the inner part outwards; and the purpose of this stitch is that you sew like the furrier sews furs, leaving one side once before taking up the thread again so that the entire suture is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of stitching, which Galen describes specifically, is thus: Some assemble the two parts naturally together and apply one end of the silk thread to the other in this way: Insert a needle near the edge of the wound and pierce only that spot, leaving both ends of the silk thread; then turn the needle and pierce from the outside until it reaches the inside at both ends of the silk thread; then pierce both again from the outside until it reaches the inside through two other needles placed on the opposite side. This is the proper manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this word and some confirm it: One should stitch the abdomen with two needles, each having thread; one needle should be placed on one side and the other on the opposite, in the manner of those who sew hides. Know that when the wound is within the belly, the stitching is more difficult than in other places on the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is as follows: When you find the wound fresh with all its blood before it has moved, first replace the intestines and the skin. Then apply powdered incense mixed with wax, and if it has moved, apply any available ointment until the wound closes. Then stitch the wound and bind it firmly with linen cloth and bandage; then treat the wound like others until it is healed. If you have no medicines, as soon as it begins to swell, apply old cotton immediately and stir it twice a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	But in many dispositions where wounds are simple, you have no need for other medicines. And if you suspect that the wound is communicating with principal limbs, then it is necessary to moisten lightweight linen in warm olive oil or rose oil and place it around the angles and under the armpits. And if there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then perform black wine enema tinctures, especially if putrefaction reaches the intestines; pierce within and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines called "jejunum" cannot heal when wounded due to the thinness of their vessels and the delicacy of the entire body, as well as its similarity in nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the spleen jumps out of the wound, replace it immediately like the intestines when fresh; but if it is old and has turned green or black, you must tie off the dark-colored part to prevent bleeding, as there are vessels and arteries present. Then cut away what is between the ties, and hang both heads down from below the wound until the spleen falls out, so that the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	from dislocation of the eyeball
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ruptured and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in certain people. I saw a man pierced in the belly with a lance; the wound was on the right side of the stomach, became inflamed, and turned into a fistula from which digestion and wind escaped. I applied treatment as best I could, and did not cease until he was healed, and his place was sound again.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him bound, I doubted that the patient had illness in his belly; but there was no illness, and he remained in better disposition, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that if there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied in this manner: take pins with large heads, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the pin has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it strains open its mouth, and then cut off its head, so that it cannot be untied; then place another pin afterward in the same manner as before until the wound is completely closed.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	These heads [of pins] often enter the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine in this manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that is most skinless, and then tie at its head a thin twisted linen thread, then put the thread into the needle, and stitch up the intestine, and draw it through the opening; and this manner of pin stitching is no more than according to the way of trust and hope; but if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is neither remedy nor health except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	"of fistula wherever it may be"
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know this: any wound or abscess that becomes hollow is universally called a 'fistula,' and likewise when it swells and contracts.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is truly a hollowed-out wound with thick and white flesh, without pain, also swollen like the feathers of a bird; sometimes it clears up smoothly, other times thickly; sometimes small, other times large. I have already spoken about this in my division on wounds: any wound that does not heal because there is no flesh forming is due to one of eight causes: either the blood or flesh is too thin; or its nature is evil; or there is hard scar tissue inside and on the lips preventing flesh from forming; or there is too much swelling; or the area is putrid, with poor quality matter; or the medicine used was not good; or the corruption is of a pestilent nature; or digestion in that region is slow by nature, tardy in healing, and naturally inflamed. I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medicinal remedies in my division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	"Now I must tell you about the treatment of fistula which is done by manual work."
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries, and nerves, or to the bladder, or to the intestines, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and so there are those that come to the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is nothing else but work and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not reach the places I have mentioned, and you trust in its cure, and recognize it, then take a tent of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, use it to search for it; and if the fistula is crooked, search for it with a subtle tent of lead, for lead bends more around the crookedness; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot search it well with tents, then rinse it with one of the openings, for moisture runs from one opening to another, and cleanses it. Then search for it by cutting according to what I have told you, and remove the fault and the corrupted flesh that are inside; and then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep in a straight place, then cut deeply as much as you can, then put moistened tents in hot medicine and place them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom. Then apply warm ointments made from healthy flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it off.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerve does not bother the main limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it until all the corruption is gone, then treat things in a way that makes it healthy; and if it is not healthy, and swells back like before, know that you have not reached the bottom: uncover further and seek until you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore it to its place; and if it is thus healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, so you cannot reach it; if there is no other way but to leave it to nature. But if there are some rotten small bones, and you can grasp them with forceps, then remove them with the appropriate instrument for this purpose. And if there are many bones, then remove them all, leaving none behind. And if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, cut away moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	Now if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something irritating to rot on the wound and let it sit until the surrounding area is entirely rotted. Then the bones will be easier to extract; but if it's a large bone such as that of the leg or thigh, simply scrape away the corruption until all darkness is gone, then restore the wound. And if there is a great portion of corruption reaching the marrow of the bone, you must cut everything up to the corruption and then treat it until solidified.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	A young man of about thirty years had pain in his leg due to an inner cause that made matter accumulate in the limb. A large abscess formed but there was no apparent reason for opening it. However, foolish physicians insisted on cutting into it repeatedly until a fistula developed with many holes through which bowels and moisture flowed from within the body. Many doctors tried to treat it over two years, but none were skilled enough to cure it. I was called in, examined his leg and his treatments, and saw that foul matter flowed out of the wounds making his skin red and yellowish.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then sought all the holes, and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurried then, and cut into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotted and perforated, and the corruption reached the bone inside; I scraped away what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and thought there was no other corruption besides that which I removed; and began to heal the wound with healing medicines for a long time, but could not close it; and then started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and scraped it away, and then removed it, and concerned myself with closing the place; but I could not do so until I cut around about a palm's breadth of the bone, and drew it out entirely to its root, then restored it with medicines; and it was healed and closed quickly, and there was no need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because often blood was evacuated, but he became entirely healthy, and in place of the bone, hard flesh grew, and it was of good condition and had no harm or opposite at all, neither in going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be done in this way: take linen, and tie it at the head of the exposed bone, and have someone pull upwards; then take another piece of thicker linen and bind it over the flesh above the bone, pulling the head so that you can draw out the rotting flesh below, and uncover the flesh on the spot where you wish to see, that the bone does not touch the flesh; and put a brand or hot stone under the bone to move the corrupt flesh away; this should be done as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and then repeated again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is decayed and does not appear, and the decay is in the middle or in one part, uncover all the flesh. Then place a hot iron underneath, and then sew from one side to the other the decay, and let the stitch be as long as the decay; thus we have said. And if the decay is at the joint, cut off the decayed joint and stitch the bone that contains it on the other side. And if the decay is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other option than to cut. And if the decay is in the wrist of the hand or in the ankle of the foot, that thing is very difficult, but nonetheless you must inquire how this decay opens. Cleanse it in all ways you can, but let not the vein nor the nerve hinder you. Know that there are many kinds of instruments to cut these bones according to their arrangement and appearance, their thickness and fineness, their size and smallness, their hardness. And for this reason, one must prepare an instrument suitable for each type of work. Know that the work will show you the instrument you need according to your knowledge of this art, and the evidence of the diseases' mannerisms. Thus consider the instrument you need accordingly.
dou feu	"from fire"
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head rots either due to internal causes or external causes. When you have treated this decay with medications but they do not help, then it is necessary to cut off that limb up to the point where the decay begins, so that the patient escapes death or the greater mischief of losing the limb. The sign is that the limb becomes black as if burnt by fire. Afterwards, this decay can spread from limb to limb and affect the whole body. Therefore, act quickly and if it is due to the sting of venomous creatures like sea scorpions, vipers, or similar ones, then cut off at the joint of the two fingers and do not allow it to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, cut off at the joint so that the decay does not reach the arm. And if it reaches the arm, cut off at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, then death is imminent, and no remedies can save him due to the quantity of its power. And similarly, when decay comes upon the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cut off after the next joint; and if it reaches the foot, cut off the whole foot; and if it goes up into the leg, cut off at the knee joint. And if it is above the knee, then there is no other remedy than to let the patient die. The method of cutting off or sewing up the limb is thus: you tie it above and below, extend some ministers one down from one tie and others upwards from the other tie, and cut open the flesh that lies between the two ties with a wide spatula until the bone is exposed; then cut off or sew up, and place on each side a linen cloth so that the wound does not touch the healthy area and cause further injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs as you operate, quickly cauterize the wound with fire, or apply powders that restrain bleeding; then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No boil ever comes in a narrow place that stays so long that it forms a large collection of pus; and then it bursts and spills out the pus, leaving the spot hollow like a vessel; and the skin above is as thin as a delicate veil, and does not penetrate to the bone or nerve, and such an illness is called 'sin' [sinus] and is not called 'fistula'; but if it is so long that it reaches down to the bone and goes deep, then it is called 'fistula'; and in this case you should cut away all of that skin entirely around it, even if it is delicate like a veil; and it does not matter for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you believe that the skin is hardened, and corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with an enema thus: observe if the breast is large, and the bowel that enters it has a foul odor. Then use this Egyptian medicine made as follows: Take equal parts of aloe, oil, and litharge, and melt them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes red-hot and as thick as honey. Then take some according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and administer the enema to the breast, plugging the opening tightly; leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; repeat this many times until the breast is cleansed and the foulness removed. And sometimes use an enema of ash water when this medicine is not available; take ashes from burnt vine wood, pour water over them, let them cool, and administer as an enema until you know that the breast is well cleaned. If the patient cannot tolerate this, nor the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then use an enema of water and honey with a little powdered litharge added; or use an enema of honey and mixed wine that has properties to cleanse and wash, and makes the flesh harden. And when you have done this, and believe that the breast is well cleansed, then administer an enema of such things as cause new flesh to grow there; take diachylon plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine. Or use other medicines and ointments whose properties I have mentioned in the section on ointments. And if the opening of the breast is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter, then widen it slightly with an iron tool, and insert a wick of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened sufficiently; and if the wound is too large, then sew it up and leave only the place where the enema can enter. And if the opening that admits the bowel is above, then cut lower down so that it enters.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the bowel is deeply prolapsed, do not allow any flesh to enter; and if you cannot grasp the lower part of the breast as you wish, then arrange it in such a way that the bowel goes to its lowest position, for when the bowel is deep, no flesh should enter it. And if you cannot grasp the lower part of the breast as you wish, then arrange it in this manner: let the bowel run easily downward, and leave nothing of the bowel; and take consolidative medicines to put on the skin, and stretch over all the skin with a linen cloth; then cut strongly towards the opening of the breast somewhat larger than the first, for afterwards every day once remove the large outer cloth; and that which is on the opening of the breast, often remove it to remove the bowel, and know what comes from the bowel, whether it's venom or little or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or no, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been thus extended and you see the nature that rises on the opening of the breast, then know that the breast is already healed, and approaches health. And then untie it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if after many days the breast continues to secrete undigested milk, know that the breast is not healing.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair of health, for recovery is near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If it happens that wounds take a long time to heal or conversely heal too quickly, and if undigested food rises from the stomach after many days without causing pain in the stomach, know that the stomach is not injured; but if the stomach takes a long time to digest, and is far away, apply drying medicines in substance and power, such as diachylon ointment, for it contains much vitriol, which is the last medicine. Prepare diachylon ointment with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine; then cook it and use it accordingly. And likewise, when diachylon ointment is not present, take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, grind them into powder, and sprinkle on honey while it is over the fire. Then place the cloth on the stomach and apply it. Sometimes also administer long aristologia root and celestine roots, which are also like barley flour and centaury; use simples or compounds: grind them and make a powder, and sprinkle on the honey mentioned earlier, and use accordingly. And if the cure is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, know that the corruption has gone deep and has made an impression on the bone or hard member or ligaments. Then the treatment for fistulas should be applied, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the boil of the toe
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that originates beneath the nail of the thumb of the hand, or of the foot, or sometimes occurs in other toes; and when it becomes old and is not taken care of, so then comes a hard abscess, which runs and spreads until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes it runs all over; and the corrosion reaches to the bone, so that there is foul-smelling pain, and the head of the toe becomes large, and the color becomes dark.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If you treat it as we have said in the section above and yet the treatment does not help, then you must cut away with iron all the excess that remains of the nail, after which cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cauterization is very helpful if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy. However, if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to hurt and blister, then you must insert a narrow blade beneath the nail that pricks the flesh and push it up, cutting away that delicate flesh gently and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines onto the remaining flesh to remove all of it. Then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and apply fire, for as long as the rotted bone remains there, it cannot heal; and if you see both rotting, cut into one of them as it was said before, then treat it until it heals; and if it is infected and inflamed, causing great pain, you must first cleanse it; then cut the edge of the shoulder blade in a diagonal cut across, ensuring that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, place something on it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of gout in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Some people are sometimes born with both hands completely fleshy, and sometimes there is bone in them, and sometimes there is a nail, and some are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in certain fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those born with extra fingers do not move them, and those born at the joint of the hand sometimes can move them; cut off the fleshy one in this manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure, so he should hold onto the cover
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one who is born deaf or becomes deaf later on, you should first cut the flesh around the bone all the way to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and then polish it until it is smooth.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sinews that come together at the two joints come by birth, or by the union of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Then you must cut that scar so that the ears regain their natural shape. Afterwards, place between two wet cloths or bandages soaked in rose oil, so they do not stick together; or place between two thin pieces of lead until the place is healed as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If swelling occurs on either side with the palm, scrape away this scurf as needed.
des vils	(of villains)
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large folds filled with melancholic superfluities that come from various parts of the body. More so in legs of those who walk and work, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you should administer to him a laxative for the colon, and then the holy water of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cautery of fire is done in two ways: one is by cutting and drawing out the black blood; the other way is to raise the vein and draw it out entirely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The surgeon proceeds in this manner: first, apply a hot water bath to the leg very strongly until the thick blood is thinned. Then press on the leg of the patient from above the hip down to just below the knee; next, cut the vein at point I, II or III with a wide blade, then squeeze and draw out dark blood by hand from one end to the other, as much as the patient's strength can bear; then bind it and instruct him to abstain from black cabbage; and resume evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, but this harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The way to raise the vein is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then place it in a bath, and apply hot water until the leg turns red and the veins swell. If you have no bath, heat it by the fire, then cut at the vein near the long part above the knee or below the ankle; then cover the skin with an onion, and scrape the vein on each side until it appears when touched, and it looks red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white rope; then put the hook underneath until it raises from the skin, then lift it with the onion gently, then cut in another place three fingers above; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it with the hook as you did before, then cut another incision if necessary, then lift and cut at the two ends of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second incision; then extract it incision by incision until it all comes out, then cauterize it; and if you cannot pull and lift it, insert a needle with strong double thread, tie and pull it, and put it under the hook and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out. Be careful that it does not cut, for if it cuts, one cannot pull nor lift it, and harm comes to the patient; and when you have completely treated it, place damp wool in vinegar and rose oil on the wound, and dress it until it is clean.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the sinew is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cut off all of it; and pull it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron tool used to cut the sinew is curved, and it does not cut straight, so that it does not cut into the vein; and it should be thickly curved, for if it were thin, it would cut into the vein, but let it be thick as we have said; here is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is located in the legs, in hot regions where there are no herbs or trees growing, and on dry land with no moisture; and sometimes it grows elsewhere besides the legs, which happens due to rot that comes beneath the skin, like how snakes and worms enter between the skin and flesh inside the body.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that there comes a very great inflammation in the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to protrude outward like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, then you must wrap around it a piece of lead measuring one and a half to two fingers wide, and tie it; leave the lead hanging from the leg, and each time it starts to bleed, wrap the lead around it again and retie it. And if it is too long, cut off part of it, and wrap the remainder, but do not cut it at its root, so that it does not reenter the flesh and cause an abscess or decay in the area, leading to a bad illness; for this reason, it must be treated bit by bit up to its end, leaving nothing on the body. And sometimes this vein is as long as five or ten palms when it has been treated, and once a man came to me whose was ten palms long. And when you cut it, place one arrow in the opening and pierce it all the way down so that everything comes out; empty the matter inside it, and bring healing remedies to apply against decay for several days, then dress it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein is very large, especially when it opens at the ankle joint or on the foot, and many wounds appear from which much blood flows; treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This illness is called in our land 'cattle disease,' because it often happens to oxen. It is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, ascending and descending, moving from limb to limb until it reaches the skin where it breaks out, causing sores. This is due to corruption of certain humors, like worms, serpents, leeches, and ascarids in the belly. Doubt exists about its severity because when it travels through the body, if it reaches the head, it may enter the eye and destroy it; this happens frequently.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and pulled out, one can only do so when it is moving. Therefore, tie the skin above and below with a strong, tight string, then cut and pull it out. If the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and cannot be found, cauterize the area with fire until it dies. The greatest harm it causes is when it runs towards the eye, as we have said. If you see it coming near the head close to the eye, press down firmly on the eyebrow below it, then cut and pull it out. The patient should use bodily cleansing with medicinal solutions for corrupt humors, and avoid eating foods that cause corruption.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From pain caused by windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vaquería" in our land, and it is a pain that comes into certain limbs, and moves from limb to limb; I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a woman who was ill. She showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm. And shortly after, it climbed like a worm to the shoulder, as swift as quicksilver moving from one place to another; the pain left that spot, and stuck itself in the shoulder, then it soon spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm. She then told me that she was continually turning around her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	"I was greatly amazed at how she moved from limb to limb in this way, for I had never seen this disease manifest itself like this before."
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had heard many times that pain could move from one place to another, but I had never seen it happen like this in a woman. And I thought that this happened because the woman had a dry body and uncovered veins, which allowed this constraint windiness to appear; whereas it does not appear according to this reason in those who are dislocated, and have moist bodies and concealed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then place heat above and below hastily, and then cut until that constrained wind escapes from its place; and cauterize the place; and if you cannot see it with your eyes, then treat it with remedies that drive out winds, such as fetid pills and pills of saffron, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	"The causes of hiccups are varied according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they occur."
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The varieties of them are such that there are some which have large points and small ones, and barbed and welded; and those which have two angles, and those which have long shafts, and those where there are pieces broken off; and those that fall into any limb fall in two ways: either into principal limbs, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls therefore into any place in these limbs, and the signs of death that I shall tell you hereafter appear to you: then it is necessary that you beware of extracting this arrow, for death comes afterward in many ways; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out and dress the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the skull when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and jumps the sinew that is upon the skull, is when there is darkness and dizziness and faintness and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasm and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes it goes without fever from the nostrils or ears; and sometimes it loses speech and voice; and blood comes out of the wound white like feathers, and also burns of flesh; and if these signs appear, then you should attend to the cure, and remove the arrow if it is not already embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	And the sign of the arrow when it falls upon the heart is that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were struck into something hard, not empty; and sometimes the arrow moves like a feather, and black blood comes out in a clot, and coldness and cold sweat come on, and fainting: then you shall know without doubt that the person is dying.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	"The sign of hiccups that occur near the lung is when foamless sputum suddenly comes from the wound; the throat swells up and the patient changes color, sighs loudly, and seeks cold air."
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	"And if hiccups occur in the covering of the stomach, near the ribs, they cause much belching and great pain with sighing; all the members of the shoulders move."
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	"And if hiccups occur in the stomach, sometimes undigested meat comes out from the wound."
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	"And if hiccups occur in the belly and blood flows through the intestines suddenly, there is no hope of recovery or extraction of the hiccup."
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	"And if hiccups occur in the bladder and urine suddenly comes out with blood, and the patient feels strong pain, know that the wound is mortal."
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	"Other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary muscles, spinal column, buttocks, thighs, and legs, etc., are safe according to many conditions."
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	"When hiccups occur in a nerve or artery and are not venomous, as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do the same."
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one that an arrow struck him near the root of his nose; I probed it and drew it out from beneath the ear's fat without causing harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And drawn out was an arrow that struck the fat of the eye beneath its membrane, and the arrow's head had entered, but only its point could be reached towards the timber, and it was large like a Turkish bow, all of light iron without ears; the patient was healed, and no ill accident befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And an arrow was drawn from the throat of a Christian, and it was Arabian with ears; I cut its barbs and carefully drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And an arrow was drawn from one who had fallen in the belly and thought he would die; but after thirty days his condition did not change; I cut into the arrow, crafted a hook, and drew it out without causing harm.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to treat a man struck by an arrow on the back, and the wound has healed over it; and the arrow remains inside him, and did not change its natural position, nor cause harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you wish to treat another man struck by an arrow in his face, and the wound has healed over it; and remained thus without causing great pain; and many others similar.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And an arrow was drawn from the prince's eye of the king, which had fallen into it and was slightly inclined towards the right side; and the arrow was completely buried when I was called for treatment three days after it fell.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	Using all my skill and care, I could not feel it; but he felt pain and discomfort under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I put on the affected area an attractive, digestive plaster to prevent inflammation; and the head of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the plaster for many days and reopened the wound, and thus the patient remained for a long time until he felt the arrow in his flesh one day later.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed a corrosive medicine on the wound for many days until it opened, and tested it; I felt the head of the arrow sticking in its place. Then I inserted this medicine into the opening of the wound so that the head of the arrow became visible; this lasted about four months. After this, the wound healed over so much that I could not remove the arrowhead with forceps. Therefore, I did not cease to devise ways and means using various instruments until, one day, I took hold of it with well-made forceps, according to what is described at the end of this chapter; thus I drew it out and closed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; I then set it right, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient became entirely sound.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have told you about the qualities of extracting certain arrows; therefore, do not rely on what I have not mentioned, for books cannot cover everything. However, wise masters examine even small details and find new works and tools based on present and missing information in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows come out of the limbs where they are stuck in one of two ways: either through the point where they entered or through another part. Those that come out through the place where they entered are called 'entering' arrows, and sometimes this happens suddenly.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out suddenly, leave it alone until the flesh rots around it and the exit is opened. Similarly, if it is stuck in bone and cannot come out on its own, leave it alone for a few days and move it gently each day. Then it will come out; but if it still won't come out, carefully cut around it with a fine knife until the surrounding area is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the bone of the skull and goes into one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the symptoms I mentioned appear in the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it there for a few days until it becomes even, because if the arrowhead comes into the brain, death will result.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrowhead is stuck only in the bone and does not reach the brain, and the patient remains for some days without bad symptoms, then you can attempt to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if it is very deeply stuck and cannot come out, then apply poultices around it as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healed."
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrowhead is buried in the flesh so that one cannot see it, then search for it carefully. And if you feel it, pull it out with some appropriate instrument. And if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins there, then widen the wound until it is large enough. Then pull out the arrowhead if you can. And if there are barbs on the arrowhead by which it holds fast, cut away the flesh that is stuck in both sides of the wound as much as you can. Then break or bend the barbs of the arrowhead so that you can pull it out without breaking it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	"And if you cannot do it all at once, leave the arrowhead until the wound around it is healed, then pull it out, for extraction will be easier."
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if blood flow opposes you, then follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter; and beware of the nerve incision and the vein, and consider how you can carefully pull out the arrow without danger, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the position they were in when the arrow struck them, for that is the greatest help. And if you cannot do so, then place them according to what signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	If the arrow came from another side, where something of it can be seen or the skin is swollen there: cut until you can grasp it with forceps, and then extract it.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, twist your hand round until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be extracted, leave it for now and then restart the extraction until it comes out. And if the shaft of the arrow is there, remove the entire shaft. And if the shaft has fallen and you see that pushing is necessary, use the hooked instrument so that the tip of the arrow enters the hook of the instrument; then push it out, and if the arrowhead is hooked, insert the instrument with its pointed end to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrowhead has touched the lung,
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls into the foot or the belly or the bladder or the side, and it is close, you can probe for it; guard against probing the vein and the nerve, then extract it, and then suture the wound if necessary; care until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat splints is similar to a bird's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types of them: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like that of a bird's feather, for striking at the tip of the arrow, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the pliers for attaching and removing is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common flesh
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The thirty-one veins from which one bleeds are as follows: sixteen at the head, namely: two temporal arteries behind the ears called 'dou Herbech'; and two arteries appearing in the temples; and two veins in the corners of the eyes called 'aspirers'; and one vein in the forehead; and one vein at the back of the nose; and two jugular veins in the neck; and two veins above the mouth, which are called 'augeherich'.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins commonly used in each arm are three: one is the cephalic, and it lies along the left side, and laypeople call it "the vein of the head"; and the median is called "deep," and it consists of the cephalic and basilica, and laypeople call it "the vein of the heart"; and the basilica lies along the right side, and laypeople call it "the vein of the belly," and it is above the fibula, and this is the one that opens up clearly on the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the "savate" vein is between the little finger and ring finger, having two branches; and in the leg there are three veins: one under the bend of the left pouch, and the second saphenous vein on the right ankle; and the vein called "nese," which is at the other ankle's heel; and there are three more veins under those in the other leg.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The veins behind the ears help in ancient treatments and bleeding. The quality of the bleed is as follows: raise the patient's head and rub where the veins are with a rough cloth. Then have the patient tighten their neck with a bandage until two veins appear behind the ears, hanging from the top. Then feel for the pulse beneath your fingers, and press gently. Take the lancet and insert it under the vein up to the bone. Then lift your hand upstream along the vein and cut both layers of skin and vein deeply enough that blood flows freely. Then press and bind until it stops bleeding.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Bleeding from the two arteries in the temples is useful for ancient treatments and for sudden illnesses, and for customary eye treatments, and for wet eye pain. The method of bleeding is as follows: Have the patient tighten their neck until both veins appear clearly. Then feel the pulse beneath your fingers and press gently. Next, raise your hand to place your index finger on top of the vein and insert the lancet underneath, lifting the vein upward and cutting it as you did with the other two veins, allowing blood to flow according to necessity. Then release the patient and hold your finger over the vein for an hour before applying cotton. Finally, bind it tightly until it stops bleeding. We have already spoken about their cutting and extraction in the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bloodletting from the frontal vein is as beneficial as that from the cephalic for treating old facial diseases, and for migraines, and redness. The characteristic is that the patient strains their neck in twisting, so much that the vein appears; then they take the tool called "fosseur," of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point upon the vein and press with your hand or something else, allowing blood to flow according to what you see fit; then loosen the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it stops bleeding and sometimes use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, it is not necessary for the bandages to be too tight; and tie them diagonally, because the bone is nearby, and by chance the bandage may break if it is too thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bloodletting from the two veins that are in the temples is beneficial for the eyes and for dizziness and redness of the face, and for inflammation of the eyelids. The characteristic of their bleeding is that the patient strains their neck while turning one way or another, as previously described; then let the blood flow across, a bit long and wide, since there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the bandage is too thin, it may break. Then let out blood according to your necessity and then tie on cotton, tying it tightly
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	For the cauterization with fire, instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; if they are prickly at their base, hold their eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	For the cauterization of the two veins [in the elbow], it helps with strangury, and the beginning of catarrh, and many illnesses, and measles, and corrosives, and herpes, and nosebleeds. The procedure is as follows: the patient should tilt their head to one side and another, as we have said; then let the master be standing on the patient's head, and the patient sitting on a chair. Then cauterize the vein for a short time somewhat widely, and draw blood temperately or as much as necessary. Then do the same in the other vein, untie the ligature, and press gently around both veins so that the patient does not strangle; leave it until the morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sanctity of the veins above the lips helps with coughing in the mouth and with gum corrosion, lip fissures, nosebleeds, and around the nostrils
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of health are such that you should have the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I've said; then turn their lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which are known by being black, and by having small black veins around them: therefore cut both of them, and if you do not know them or are in doubt, cut the largest from each side, and do likewise for the two veins that are above and below, as this is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of the veins that are beneath the tongue aids after the cephalic bleed, and is used for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth; and its qualities are such that the patient sits between your hands before the sun, raises their tongue, and looks beneath each side for a black vein: therefore cut one and the other, but do not go too deep, as beneath them lie the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the arm are commonly opened in two ways: either by pricking with a broad-pointed instrument like a lancet, or with an olive-shaped, pointed one like a knife tip, and these are called "anesil"; they are broad and pointed according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the myrtle flame is very well-known, and it is wide as you see
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary for opening hairy veins full of visible thick blood, and containing thick and turbid blood; and this is the shape of the olive-pointed lancet.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more finely pointed and is for healing thin veins that contain clear yellow blood
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps those with illnesses under the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen. And the veiner must vein skillfully and beware of the artery that lies beneath it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he hits the artery and blood starts flowing, then it must be stanched as I have said; and the point of the lancet should not be prickling but cutting like an 'anesil'.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilisk does not open up clearly, then you must extract it and replace it with another; or if you wish to perform some operation on it, or sew in its place the vein within the arm: it opens up clearly; and cauterize the wound with fire.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to recognize the location of the vein, then first extract the arm, touch the location until you feel the pulse; then mark the location with ink, and tie the arm, cauterize the vein with fire. And be careful not to strike the artery when you see the location swell, for it is the artery: avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see something swell up high like urine from a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood: hurry quickly then, place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens; tie the arm, leave it thus, and do not let the patient move it; be careful, do not let him move until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stopped and you faint, and there is no physician present, then cut the artery if it is open for the sake of the head; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of fig tree bark, and cut it, then take one half and tie it firmly until the next day; if blood oozes out, that's good. If not, treat it with powders that stop bleeding, as we have said; these stoppings are not harmful in many situations due to the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm's ligature.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The bandage of the vein in midsection helps draw blood from above the head and below the body, because it is composed of basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said. The surgeon must be careful about the nerve underneath, and if he pricks too deeply, and hits the nerve, inflaming it, then the wound may not heal; this nerve opens frequently, but in some men it does not open due to its fineness, so you must use an instrument called the anserine vein finder. Avoid damaging the nerve with all your strength.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is space between the two nerves, make an incision along it
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The bloodletting of the cephalic vein helps by drawing blood from the head and aids in eye disorders; and it is preferable to perform bloodletting at the elbow olive or the elbow mirtin, for this is the safest of all veins as there are no nerves nor arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, one should seek the easiest location, and if it fails at first, try again without causing any harm. Sometimes the area may swell in some people when it is attempted for the first time, but it causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the surgery depends on your skill.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it is only performed to preserve health and prevent future illnesses. It should be done in one of the three veins located on the arm: the cephalic, basilic, or median basilica vein. Bloodletting should begin during Lent at the start of winter and autumn, after meals when signs ofpletion appear. It should be done on either the first or third day of the week, two or three hours after noon.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The balm that is administered to the sick has no fixed time, but it must be given when needed by day or night at all hours and at all times; and one should not anoint children up to 14 years of age nor women during the four months after giving birth until seven days have passed.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should one operate on the elderly who have passed sixty years of age
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to be anointed, in whatever manner it may be, they must first cleanse the intestines with a light enema if there is much retained feces so that the veins do not draw harmful impurities from the intestines into the principal members; nor should one anoint someone who is too salty from eating meat or who is drunk until he is sober again, nor those who are dropsical. And one should not anoint after a bout of colic pain, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive menstruation in women, work, wakefulness, fasting, or anything that uses up all strength; then refine the humors with foods and drinks and medicines if you have the power to do so; then enter into a bath if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood, and anoint from the vein on the arm around the third part as we have said; and guard against work, eating, lust, and similar things that day; be cheerful and joyful, and let the anointing person stand higher than the one being anointed, and rub his arms twice or three times, then stretch the lien over the middle, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow properly; then wet the finger of his left hand with a little old oil and place it on that vein below where he wants to anoint, so that the vein does not swell or burst from the striking.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flee like cords to the sinew, and some such are full of windiness so that when one puts on the flame it retreats from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus many are injured; and if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, therefore the surgeon must be cautious in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens on the first try, that is good; but if not, then restart a little lower or higher, as long as the area is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the place is swollen and the patient fears it, let him rest for one or two days without tying up his arm: perhaps white abscesses will come forth; do not go into a bath afterwards, then recommence the cautery if he pleases; and if the hole is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not flow enough, then apply all the flame directly to that hole; and burn it a little hastily before the place becomes swollen; for often this happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swollen, do not recommence the cut, and put upon it a bit of oil ointment, for it lightens the body's blood, and in this place the oil has power to soften what is hard; and thus administer the oil ointment in each cut that you make into veins, to stop the flow of blood; and it does the same thing for liver and lung, when put upon the place; so subtlely does the blood thin out when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess appears there, which happens often, especially when it is not cut for any other time than that single opening of the vein, then hurry and put upon the place sponge moistened in water and heated over some heat for an hour; and you must do this after the blood has stopped flowing from the vein, and if it remains on the place for a few days with some blackness or greenness, do not worry about it; and if you see, put upon it something of aloe or myrrh mixed in juice of calamint, masterwort, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is swelling and appearance of inflammation at the time of surgery like that of the basilisk: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the area soft under the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore be sure not to apply any of the remedies we have mentioned, for perhaps blood would flow from the artery; but instead make one dry dressing to harden the area, then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw off blood according to its quantity and according to its color.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if it is thick, let it flow until it becomes thinned; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and robust, and needs bloodletting, that a larger wound be made, and the flame be wide; but for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is fitting to lance shallowly and often, and one should lance by cutting across, not by pricking; and this method of letting blood saves from loss of blood and injury to nerves, and is better than a long or wide lance.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body fails at letting blood, give them a moistened powder made from pomegranate juice; if they are heated, let three or four bleedings be done. And if they are of cold complexion, before letting blood, let them eat bread moistened in thickened mucilage syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after losing much blood, afterwards he should inhale broth of flesh, and fragrant subtile syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the chapter on syncope for evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to empty the arm vein and be bled again later, it is necessary that when he is weakened by much bloodletting, he be bled little by little according to his continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to empty the arm vein after the first bloodletting and has a strong body, should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to have blood drawn from another vein should be bled on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood inside the body that is already heated and causes fever; so it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and widen the opening until it reaches the forearm; then when you have attended to all the conditions of fainting, place your hand on his pulse when he faints, so that the blood does not return to the forearm, which happens often when the attendant is careless; and this is not necessary if you see that you must loosen the arm and cause blood to flow out again, nor if the opening is curved should he quickly extend his arm, for that would be bad; but let him remain until he faints a second time; or you can cauterize with the tip of the flame until the frozen blood at the vein's opening flows out, then place some cotton soaked in water on it and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not squeeze it until the inflammation has subsided.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there is a necessity to draw blood a second time, do so in the same vein or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are bled in place of the head vein because they are connected.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of cauterizing is thus: The patient immerses their hand in warm water until the blood vessels become red. Then tie it moderately so that the vein appears well. Now cauterize across, not wide or long. Make the opening large and cauterize close to the joint of the hand. If blood does not flow out, immerse the hand again in warm water and let enough blood flow into the water. If it is summer, do not immerse the hand again in warm water because more immersions are done in winter than in summer. The cauterization of this vein is safer than all others as there is neither artery nor nerve present.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The cauterization of the saving vein of the right hand is beneficial for all liver diseases. Here's how: Press on the hand and immerse it in warm water until the vein swells so that you can see it. If you cauterize across and cut completely throughout, there will be no discomfort. However, do not go too deep because nerves lie beneath all skin surfaces. Then put the hand back into warm water if blood is congealed in the wound and cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	"And once you have cleaned off as much blood as necessary, then place a bandage of oil and flax to quickly bind the wound, and do this for each wound."
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	"The swelling in the left hand is attributed to mouse disease, so perform the same treatment as I have instructed for the right hand."
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the spleen is beneficial for all ailments beneath the body, such as diseases of the marrow, retention of fluids, diseases of the reins, and old afflictions of the thighs and legs, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its salve are that the patient places his foot in hot water, and rubs it on the vein until it breaks, and then binds the ankle joint; this vein is at the ankle, and many kidneys go up along the leg; therefore, heal where the largest kidney or at the ankle, which moves better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	"And if you cauterize on the foot, beware of the nerves beneath it, and make the cautery like a cut; and let the flame be gentle."
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	"And if the blood cannot flow out, then put the foot back in the water and allow the vein to drain well."
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the salve fails the first time, then apply it again a little higher up, for the spot is salty; do not fear nerve damage, as we have said, and do likewise with the spleen salve of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	"The location of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle joint, and its cauterization benefits sciatica pain when it is due to hot blood."
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of its salve are that the patient enters into a bath and presses above the ankle with four fingers while twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then apply the salve in all ways you can, including transversely; and it is better that you cover it, for the spot is dry and it becomes very swollen on many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then choose any vein that opens at the foot's heel, towards the little toe, and beware of nerves. And make sure to bind the blood vessel tightly until you see blood, then untie it, and place cotton on top and secure it; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	And regarding cupping treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	"Cupping vessels are made of horn, or earthenware, or glass; and cupping is performed in two ways: either by pricking to attract blood, or without pricking."
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping treatment that does not involve bloodletting is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire. And the cupping treatments that are performed by pricking and drawing blood are carried out on fourteen parts of the body: one is entirely on top of the head, another is in the neck, two others are on both sides of the neck, one below the chin, two on the shoulders, two on the hips, two on the arms, two on the legs, and two on the ankles. Cupping treatments do not draw blood, except for a few scattered veins in the flesh, so they do not weaken at all like those done by vein cautery. They should therefore not be administered with or without fire in any disease caused by repletion until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary due to illness to relieve oneself, or due to customs, then administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and also in between and at all times; for there are those who, when they need to relieve themselves, have a heavy head; and there are those who findpletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and such as find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have an enlarged tongue, and faint; and there are those who dream, and see by nut blood and wounded and dead and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	"And when we see these signs, especially if they occur during the month, we order cupping to be performed after three hours of the day."
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The discharge of mucus helps with the dryness of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this be done after the evacuation of all bodily waste; and this discharge replaces the discharge of the cephalic, and those who are of cold complexion should not use it, or who have catarrh, for it does them great harm; and therefore old men should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	"And those who often bleed themselves become forgetful, so one must place the cupping vessel a little lower down to avoid forgetfulness."
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Wind in the neck is located at the junction of the head and the spine. Therefore, it benefits from the stretching of the breast and the splitting of the vessels of the diaphragm, and from sudden movements and fullness; but one should put little pressure on it, for if it holds too firmly, it can cause dizziness in the stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Wind in the second cervical vertebra causes headaches and eyestrain, migraine, and strangling pain at the roots of the teeth. It is located at the junction of the spine. You must instruct the patient to press their hand gently when applying the cupping glass, so that it does not cut the artery or cause excessive bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	"Cupping under the chin is beneficial for mouth diseases, gum inflammation, and similar conditions that are in the mouth; it is in lieu of bloodletting from both lips."
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	"Cupping on the shoulders is beneficial for illnesses that come from heat and excess;"
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Wind in the ribs is beneficial for three veins of the arm because it draws blood from those large veins. Instruct the patient not to heat the cupping glass too deeply, as that area lacks flesh and contains nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	"A cupping vessel placed on the buttock is beneficial for hemorrhoids and lower abdomen diseases. The vessel should be large and made of brass to draw well; if it were too thin, it might break and cause large wounds."
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	"Cupping on the legs draws openly, for it attracts blood from the whole body and is beneficial for old back pains, sciatica, bladder inflammation, and it strengthens the flesh. It is in lieu of the two sophenes (groin muscles) and the two ankles, but it can also weaken the body with prolonged use and cause edema in various conditions."
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	"The method of applying the cupping vessel is as follows: first place it empty and suck gently but steadily. Then apply it quickly and move it evenly until you see the area turn red and swollen, and the skin becomes flushed. Then remove it and replace the vessels. Be cautious about the condition of the body, for some people have thin flesh and clear pores; in this case, one should strike only once and make wide but not too deep wounds. Suck gently."
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	"If the blood is thick, then one must strike twice: the first time to refine the path of the thick blood."
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	"And if the blood is very dense, one must strike a third time. But if we wish to draw only a little blood, once will suffice."
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we desire much blood, let us recommence often; and if the blood is thick, let us fire a dart deeply, and let the end be such that the heart is pierced suddenly; and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you apply the places of cups with aperitive and dissolvent oil: if it is in summer, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, of cress oil, or of lily, or camomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	"And if the excess blood is thick and cold, use myrrh oil, balsam oil, fennel oil, or similar."
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one whose skin is tender and has wide pores is treated with a cautery, no oil should be applied there, but it should be washed afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	"And those with excessive moisture should rise using hyssop water, myrtle water, sumac water, or similar substances."
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excessive fullness rise from old wine or clear water, or decoction of fennel or chamomile, or others alike; and it is not necessary to use a cupping glass before or during the bath, but afterwards one hour or two after the bath; and do not sleep after the cupping, and it is necessary that he be cautious when he must undergo cupping and when he undergoes cupping.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware those who have undergone cupping are choleric, and their blood is too hot and inflamed; therefore they should consume cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce with vinegar, and similar things; and eat figs, and castrated meat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have cold complexion should consume honey syrup, and moderately fragrant wine which is between old and new, and eat pears, and figs, small birds and chickens; and on the day that he undergoes cupping, he should drink more than he eats; and sometimes it is necessary to give some people treacle or muscat before or after cupping, to strengthen the main limbs; but let the blood be subtilized, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Ventouses applied without pricking are those placed on the liver, womb, podagra, belly, thigh, and back. These members do not tolerate being pricked and this is done only to draw blood from one member to another, as we apply them to the breasts when there is inflammation; to remove viscosity from the member, as we apply ventouses to the belly and thigh to slenderize it; and to alleviate pain where there is obstruction or stone, perhaps drawing off the obstruction through its attractive power, or displacing the stone from its place. Thus they act when placed on the liver and womb when there is retained windiness, these ventouses being administered empty merely to suck. Sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in pleurisy cases, so that one fills the ventouse with hot water only, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of administering the cupping glass with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And let it be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have on the side around the middle one small hole like for inserting a needle, made of brass or iron, smooth at its tip so it doesn't cut the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle have a transverse bar of brass or iron for placing an imprisoned candle, and let there be both large and small ones according to the diseases and the age of those who use them; for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of elders, and those of the thin are different from those of the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And you should place this cupping glass on the limb thus: take a candle of wax or flax and put it inside the cupping glass through the bar that is within it, so that its flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass lest it burn the patient; then place it on the limb, ensuring that the two holes we mentioned are on top, so that when you wish, steam can escape, and you remove the cupping glass; and take the flax as before, and repeat it often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping procedure used for pleurisy with acute inflammation, it has neither stalk nor hole and is not filled with fire unless when it is full of air, and is placed only on the limb; that is its shape.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without fire are used those cupping procedures that cannot be applied where cups are too small, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in places without flesh, such as the toes or nose, and others like them. The quality of this procedure is that when you find leeches that are in sweet, clear waters without any damage, you take them; and put them one by one in sweet water until they become accustomed and have nothing inside their bellies; and then prepare the vein and the cupping procedure, rub the limb until it becomes red, and place the leeches on top. And when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where you can apply a cup, apply one, for this works greatly afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this is not so, then raise the level with oil first, and then with water very well, and then squeeze it. And if the level rises too high on the body of the veins, then moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and put it on until the blood is stanched. And if the blood increases too much, then put powdered vitriol or salt, etc., until it is stanched; or you may put half a handful of peeled peas on the level, and leave them until they adhere to the level, now it will be stanched. And if you still need more, then take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the veins refuse to take, then rub the level with fresh blood, or stick a needle in it until the blood flows out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere; and when you see that they are falling off, then powder some alum and celandine leaves crushed together, or ashes, so they will stick now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and provides treatment for broken bones and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know this, dear son, that foolish physicians throw themselves into this chapter without ever having seen any of the old books or read a letter of them; and for this reason knowledge is estranged in our land, for I found none good; and know nothing save through the science of the old books whereof I have studied so much that I have treated the science therein, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have briefly described to you here what is contained in this chapter and abridged it at the end, clearly showing the forms of instruments that are arranged thus as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	"Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the sums of speech and chapters where the wise places his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are tried may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others."
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or bruising happens to anyone, then you must hasten to treat the patient on both sides if nothing prevents you from doing so, such as weakness of body, childhood, old age, or if time is not very hot nor too cold; and avoid eating cold things, namely cold drinks, and bird and hare meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, nor fill yourself too full with foods that fill the veins with blood until you doubt the formation of a hot boil or expansion of matter in the limb. Let the patient return to his usual diet as he has used it before.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	"And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the sick person with foods that promote growth and have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pears, and veal, eggs, fresh fish, and similar things, and strong wine."
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	"For with this nourishment the wound will close more quickly and completely."
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of the elderly and frail do not heal well nor set properly due to the weakness of their limbs, nor those that are too soft like the bones of young children; but without care, align the broken bone with large splints that hold the limb together until it heals as before; do not remove all the points of its work, and therefore it is necessary to feed them coarse meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	"And know that breaks are diverse in many ways."
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	"For a break of the head is different from a break of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways that bones can break."
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	"For there are breaks that happen suddenly, and others that occur gradually, such as when cutting a feather to make a writing pen."
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	"And there is also breakage with wounding, and breaking with just a small crack."
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each manner has its own instrument and proper device in the restoration, according to how the limb comes into its place; and bone fracture is known by the twisted joint, clearly apparent by touch, and audible under pressure of the hand; but when there is no twisting nor sound upon touching, and the patient feels little pain, then there is no fracture; yet it may have some twisting or cracking or minor break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	"So do not move the limb by hand, but apply the medications that come later and then gently immobilize it."
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture which goes into the air, and are the two parts dislocated, it is necessary to align them evenly before an ulcer comes; and if a hot ulcer comes, let it remain some days until the ulcer is pacified; then set it evenly at the move that you can do lightly and surely, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than those with pieces; then hold it as it should be done hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are pieces of bone broken, and they are separated into two parts, if it is the hand or foot, or use your hand if it is a small member, or with two ropes, or one rope and your hand; and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are disunited, then join by all means the additions in their places at the move that you can do, and ensure that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and fit together well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	"And you can feel with your hand whether it is well aligned or not: if not, realign it carefully and do not immobilize too tightly nor press in such a way that heat and stiffness are caused in the limb due to poor technique, as we have said many times before."
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, then caution the patient well that he does not move it, neither awake nor asleep, nor turning, nor in any other manner; and ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And when he feels no pain, it is not in place, and it must be put into such a position that he feels no pain; and ensure that it is set straight, so that there are no twists when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	"Know that broken limbs are diverse in size, shape, and thickness."
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	And for small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar: they must be wrapped in soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg: they must be wrapped in a wide and hard bandage, because wide bandages embrace the whole large limb, and constrain it evenly on all sides, so that there is no twitching; then tie around light pads, three or four turns depending on the limb, and tighten your hand a little on all the bandages, then go up above the break and tighten less, so that the break can separate a little from the break; and soften the bandage little by little until you grasp most of the sound part, then take another bandage and wrap it around again over the broken place; then return to the part below the break and tighten moderately, neither too much nor too little, as we have said above in the first binding; then put between the bandages linen pads or cloths, so that it is all even, then tie everything together with one bandage from above, and then place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something that cools and relieves the abscess heat, and removes the swelling, and leave it like this for several days; then press with your elbows, using half of a wide cane (split lengthwise), or wood used to make splints, or palm ribs, and they should be shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the splint placed on the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others; it should also be long enough for the size of the limb; then press onto the splints just as you did with the first binding; then tie it above with a fine thread, like in the first binding at the break; make it tighter gradually, less so at first; and the threads must be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen; for if they are too thick, as I have seen in some foolish workers' work where they use twisted cords for their bindings, this is a great mistake, because the binding cannot be even if it is too narrow, and there should be no less than two fingers of space between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	If the patient is injured by the edges of the stakes after stretching in safe places, then place pads of linen or woolen gauze beneath them so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When a wound is accompanied by fracture and the bone is broken, I will describe its treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not advisable to stretch all broken limbs with stakes on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	When the limb is large, it should not be put in splints until after 6 or 7 days, or more, depending on your confidence in the heat of the abscess; and here you will find the method of ancient dressings for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: you should take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill and mix it with abundant eggs, and make this mixture neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common way of dressing to restore a fracture in many positions, and especially for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to make plaster for healing fractures and dislocations and torsions: Take bdellium, ladanum, lavender, asafetida, gum arabic, and mastic powder (each .x. ounces); myrrh and aloes (each .v. ounces); and aloe wood (.viiij. ounces). Grind these into a fine powder and mix it with plenty of eggs. If the person's constitution is hot, use this plaster because it has a good composition and quickly heals broken bones; useful for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to make a dressing that is useful for twists: take mugwort and wormwood, each 10 drachms; myrrh and aloes, each 9 drachms; acacia 6 drachms; balsam of Armenia 10 drachms, and grind well, then mix with water or abundant eggs, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other method for treating dislocations and bones displaced from their places, relieves the pain occurring, and removes the swelling and breaking: take new linen, moisten it in hot water mixed with oil, and place on the location.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore (set bones), but it is good for soothing a hot boil, and removes pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method to reset broken bones: Take dry fig leaves, and leaves of earth dock, grind together, make poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to soften the remainder of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of comfrey, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each one part; grind and combine with wine. If the limb is hot, combine it with cold coriander water or water, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of plaster more powerful than the first one when hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of comfrey, linseed, balm, mallow, and cinquefoil, violet and chamomile flowers, each one part; grind and combine with salt water or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not apply anything to the broken limb for setting besides wax and oil ointment, and nothing else more. He also says that it should be of medium consistency, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen believes that one should apply dry and slightly warm things to the broken limb for setting, such as myrrh, aloe, frankincense and similar substances, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another poultice recipe for wounds and pain: Take mugwort and chopped horsehair or chicken feathers, mallow, and grind them equally. Make a poultice with the resulting mixture and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	**And then you untie a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; so do not untie it for many days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or inflammation, then hasten, and untie it, and remove the dressing immediately; and take a light cloth, and a damp sea sponge, and dip in water, and lift up the place, until the itching stops, and the pain is alleviated; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry wool moistened in water or rose oil on top, and tie it with a knot, until you are sure of a hot abscess; and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and let the pain be gone, then start the tying again gently, and a little dressing, and do not pull too hard as before; and continue until it is clean.**
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	"And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and there is pain and swelling, then you must resume binding it with poultice, just as you did initially."
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if the limb receives nothing of what we have said, then do not dislocate it until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture becomes apparent, and the flesh approaches its joint; then restrain it more than before, and the limb will grow its flesh, as I said earlier; and if you see the place drying out more than necessary, know that nutrition cannot come there; therefore apply hot water compresses, every time you dislocate it, and do this every third day, and slightly loosen the bandage; by this method, nutrition comes to the limb, and quickly remedies what foolish doctors do, who restore the limb crookedly: this is evil, and such works are fearful, and I see nothing else but letting [it be] and working correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	"Concerning the different kinds of fractures"
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of fractures there are, and diverse figures, and the causes are distinguished; for there are fractures made by sword percussion, and the collarbone breaks all the bone up to the zygomatic which is under the bone, as does an axe on wood; and therefore this manner of fracture is called "hacheure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword strikes the bone without piercing it, that manner of fracture is called "absolute," and wounds from these two fractures are large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	"And if there is an embedded fracture, or a break from falling on stones, or from stones falling, or from similar causes."
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	"And if there is an open fracture that approaches the bone marrow, whether it is below or above the bone, this wound is either large or small."
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that is hidden deep in the bone like a hare's footprint, and the fracture is small, and therefore this fracture is called "capillaire"; and if the wound is made by striking with stone or falling or similar cause, and drives the piece of bone inward, and the place is raised as blacksmiths do when they strike on anvil; then the stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their head, such as children's heads; and it happens with all these kinds of fractures that small pieces are dislodged like stars; and I will speak about this in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	"And we recognize all kinds of fractures through direct examination and probing and by the corrupt flesh on top."
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	"The capillary appearance is recognized by this: when the bone is uncovered and rubbed with vinegar, the fracture becomes black."
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	"In treating a fracture, beware of accidents that may occur in illness. If you see no bad accident such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, extension and paleness, feverish chill, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar dispositions in many ways, he cannot be cured without doubt."
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	"And if you see no frightening accident and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment."
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	"And when the injured person first comes to you and it is wintertime, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the moon that you can."
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	"And if it is in summer, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day so that the flesh under the bone does not become corrupted and the accidents we mentioned do not occur."
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must cut open the fractured part in this way: and take hold of the patient's head, and uncover over the bone in every possible manner, and gently uncover around the wound's shape, and if blood discharge or a hard abscess appears when uncovering the bone, help it as needed, and fill the space with bandages moistened in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the hard abscess has subsided, and ensure there is no more bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done in two ways of working: one way is that you cut narrowly at the front, and that is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	"And then I place another chisel larger than the first."
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	"And the second way is to have many chisels of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, pointed and made of iron. Work lightly so that you do not wound the head."
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	"And if the bone is hard and strong, you must pierce around it before administering chisels with drills, making sure that they do not go too deep and stick out through the bone of the skull. The drill points should have a margin or circle on top to prevent them from sticking out through the bone. You should have many such drills so that each one fits in its proper place around the skull. Here are three ways of drilling:"
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	"The qualities for drilling around the broken bone are to place one drill on the bone and turn with both hands until you feel that the bone is pierced. Then move the drill a little further along and do this all around. Then cut away the space between the holes with chisels, doing so carefully and gently as we have said, until you can remove the bone by hand or with some tool such as forceps or tweezers. Be careful not to touch the brain or the spinal cord."
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and scraped the bone, then reset the sharpness that remains of the bone with all other tools resembling a chisel, but they must be finer and more delicate than other chisels; and if any small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with the instruments; then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	"And another way of working is that which Galien describes, which is safer. He praises it greatly and says this:"
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	"It is necessary first to uncover part of the bone where the fracture appears more. Then you will place beneath the head of this lenticular chisel, of which this is the shape:"
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side only, and the part is thin on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you gently tap around the bone, and be very careful of the cloth that is underneath; if it is adherent to the bone, remove it lightly, for it can be removed without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	"And if the fracture of the bone does not reach to the skin and the bone is cut only on top with small pieces, then smooth down that roughness and remove the chips with a fine razor, of which you should have many different sizes to use in each place according to the work and the shape of the fracture."
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	"So use larger razors first and then finer ones, continuing until it is all smooth."
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	"In each of the other kinds of hairline fractures and subtle breaks, you must use tools according to their direction. This is something that cannot be answered by someone who has not studied this art."
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is exposed, you should take one linen cloth according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled over twice or thrice, wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. Do this as gently as possible so as not to press down on the wound. Then apply another linen bandage on top, but do not tie it too tightly that it only touches the wound. Leave it like this for one or two days until the inflammation has subsided. Then remove it and apply medicines such as lily roots, violet flour, incense powder, aloes, and similar things. Make a powder of these substances and place it on the wound. Always ensure that the wound is clean, do not leave ointment on it nor let flies gather on it, for when flies gather on the brain cloth, they corrupt and poison it, causing great harm to the patient. For when something irritating is placed on the wound, it necroses from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	"So beware, then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, and be doubtful without doubting too much."
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackness appears on the outside due to the medicine applied that has such virtue, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and glue together one cloth, and apply it to the face; then treat with various remedies until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken or only one, because there are two bones; and the lower one is cartilage and does not break unless it is hit or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should place your little finger or thumb on the nail, and hold the break evenly with your index finger, pushing from below until the nail returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain from your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	"If the fracture is in the upper part near the elbow and the forearm cannot return to its place, then you must align it with the head of a splint that is somewhat thick."
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, then do likewise, and hurry to reset it on the first day if you can; but if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then wrap the nail with linen cloths.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you set one bone against another, if there is a fracture there; and let the splints be so thick that they fill the holes of the joint.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some doctors say that one must grease the tents with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It seems not good to me that they be greased with butter, but rather with a mixture of egg yolk and flour powder. Then leave the tent on until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes they place goose feathers in the place of tents, and with one soft cloth wrapped around it, if it breaks, then let the patient blow through it; now do as you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if gangrene comes nearby while you are working on it, then put cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or a little bit of diacalcic on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no abscess appears, apply an embrocation made of wheat flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk. Then apply light dressings without binding tightly. And if the fracture is small but broken into many pieces, extract it using appropriate instruments, then stitch the wound closed, and treat it with suitable plasters and ointments for healing bone injuries. If there are no wounds inside the nose, treat with tents and insert splints of lead until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Mandible fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken from behind and there is no wound in front, and the break is only on one side without being broken into pieces internally, it can be easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, you should put your left index finger in the patient's mouth; and if it is on the left jawbone, then put your right index finger in the patient's mouth, feel the break lightly with it, and support it from behind with your other hand, keeping it level.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone is broken into two pieces and dislocated from each other, then you should apply traction from both sides until it is even again.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth or fracture of them, then tie them together with a thread of gold, silver or silk, then place cerate on the broken jawbone and place over it two thicknesses of cloth; then place over the cloth a large well-made splint made of wood or a piece of leather cut to the size of the jawbone, and fasten it under the chin so that you can hold it. Command the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the face begins to swell up, then untie it on the third day, and then readjust what was loosened; then place a poultice over it made of flour with egg white or sesame flour mixed together, after you have removed the cerate; then place light linen over the poultice, and if the poultice becomes too hot, but the condition of the patient does not change, leave it on until it is healed. Many times it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if inflammation comes with heat, then apply what we have said many times [i.e., treat the inflammation as previously described].
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both fracture and wound together, make sure that no part of the bone has been taken out; then extract it with instruments suitable for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with fire according to your necessity [i.e., cauterize it].
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all the broken pieces and none remain, then sew up the wound if it is large, and place over it one of the poultices suitable for promoting granulation until it is healed.
de la forcele	Here is an entry from a medieval French medical manuscript about reducing fractures of the jawbone (mandible):
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps breaks often before and around the shoulder, and there are three ways this break can occur: where it is broken but not dislocated in two places, with fragments present, which is the easiest to reset; or where there is breaking along with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the treatment is as follows: when there is no wound accompanying the break, you should have two assistants. One will hold the forceps that has been broken; the other will extend the collar towards the part affected by the break. Then place both hands evenly on either side of the break so that its shape is restored correctly, with neither appearance nor depression present.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round pad made of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, its size depending on your needs. Then stretch and lift the forceps, holding the pad in your hand so that you can evenly align the break as needed.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you are unable to grasp the head of the forceps at the front because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on their back with their shoulders supported by a pillow. Insert a medium-sized ear spoon under the shoulder, and have an assistant press down on the shoulder until the bone of the forceps lifts up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then align the fracture with your two hands, and if you find it displaced, then you must cut on it; and pull out the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any hindrance, then use one of the incisoires that you have; but place the forceps underneath this instrument, for support.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it resembles a spoon, and is not elevated, and let it be as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two heads, as you see, one wide, the other narrow, like the width of the wound you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, then close the wound, and if the opening is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, then fill the wound with rags and bandages, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot inflammation occurs, then soak one cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The reduction of the bone, when it is without wounds and incisions, is that you place upon the bone the plaster of mill dust and egg white, and put light dressings on top, and put a splint beneath the shoulder blade if needed; then take a very large bandage a palm's width wide, then put a double cloth upon the dressings and the plaster; then take a subtle bandage three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and place the bandage on the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and beneath the healthy shoulder blade, and beneath the dislocated shoulder blade; and tighten each part, and when you see that the dressing holds the fracture well, and you see clearly that the bandage does not move upon the broken bone, then change it each day, and when the ligaments loosen, then constrain them; and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow beneath the shoulder blade to lift the shoulder upwards; so lighten the fracture of its weight by the lightening of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, up to twenty days; then begin the plastering again if needed, and tighten it and leave it thus until it is restored; and it is restored within twenty-eight days, and in less time for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Here ends the treatment for a broken shoulder.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	**It happened sometimes that the shoulder was broken or dislocated from its proper place and could not be moved back into it except by touch; then examine according to the shape of the break and reset it according to its natural form in every way you can; then put on the spot powder of millstone with abundance of eggs, and light lint, and cover it with a doubled cloth. Then put over it a wide and thin bandage, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there are any hairs under the bandage at some point on the shoulder, fill those hairs with linen wicks so that the bandage is even; then bind it firmly all around with a large bandage so that the bandage does not move from its place. Look at the dressing each day, and whenever it becomes moistened, bind it again tightly and make sure the bandage remains even if it has moved from its place. Have the patient lie on his side. The shoulder is reset in 20 or 25 days, and when this number of days is completed, then untie it, and be assured, for this is not a bone that can easily move out of place lightly.**
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks out and is not under the heart, then cut it off, and do what we have said in the treatment for a broken collarbone to calm the hot inflammation.
de la brisure dou pis	Here ends the treatment for a broken shoulder blade
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The foot is sometimes broken in mid-air, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the ankle.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it breaks in mid-air, it leans downwards and the patient feels great pain, faints quickly, often vomits blood, and sometimes the bone marrow is visible through the broken bone.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And the restoration is that the patient lies often on their back, and places one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and carefully puts them even in all ways that you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then puts emplastes and compresses on top of the subtle salt bandage, or another light wood, and wraps it in one cloth, and ties it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turns the tying roundly to the back, and tightens evenly, and loosens each hour the tie, and if it unravels, then tightens it; and if it is necessary to untie it, for corruption or for itch that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and unties it, and removes the emplaster, and addresses what has come of ways of treatments; then resets the emplaster, and tightens until it is sound."
de la brisure des costes	"of the breaking of the ribs"
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	"You should know that the breaking of ribs only happens in large places after the back, and at the head within, and they do not bend unless because they are glarious; and you can feel it well with inspection of the two sides."
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment for this is to set the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a splint, and secure it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	"And if the breaking of ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, like pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue; and soon they have points, and coughs up a lot of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the ancients put much effort into it."
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	"And there are those who say that it should be administered foods that swell the belly, to push the break outwards."
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	"We do not do this, lest many boils come if they were not there before."
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	"And if they have come, then heal them."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	"And some say that one places cupping glasses on the spot to draw out forcibly, and this seems reasonable; nonetheless, there is doubt whether the cupping glass draws out excesses to the location due to its nature of weakness."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	"And some say that one should cover the spot with damp wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to keep the bandage even around it, then treat with the pleurisy remedy of meat and medicine."
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone pressing on the flesh, and the patient is uncertain about it, then one must cut open the skin at the location of the broken bone, place a support underneath the fracture site, and carefully remove any splintered bones. Then gently pull out the bone fragments, and sew up the wound if it is large, and apply bandages until healing is complete.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms, put compresses moistened in rose oil on the spot, and apply them; continue treating the area as appropriate for an abscess, keeping it constantly warm on that side until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	"concerning the fracture of the neck"
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is bone fracture of the neck, which often occurs when it bends; similarly with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will heal or not, take note if you see their hands softened, swollen, and lifeless, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many cases, and if he moves them and feels when they are pressed or pricked, know that the bone joints are saved, and that the patient will be cured if treated.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it will heal or not, take note if the feet are softened, and if the accidents that are in the hands also appear on the back; and when pressed constantly on the belly, it releases without control.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is asleep on his back and wants to mount, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know this, that it's deadly; do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not occur, then the case is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you should watch if there is any hot boil, and apply rose oil or oil of mulefoot chicken foot until it is soothed. Then apply one of the comforting and drying emplastes, bind it with a bandage, and order the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, it is necessary to apply something on the chest. Remove the bone and then sew up the two edges of the wound if it is large with a stitch. Then treat it with salve until it is healed. And if the joint of the bone is broken, which is called the "joint of the cow", put your left hand's fist into it and make it equal to the other hand at your power, then apply the emplastre and bind it if necessary; then tighten it, and if there are bones dislocated, remove them and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Regarding the fracture of the thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It sometimes happens that the thighbone is broken, and if it does happen, there will be a slight diminution of sensation at the head. It opens on the long side, declines towards the partition, and comes to the patient with pain and piercing at the spot where it breaks; it swells up what has been broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	"And the reduction is that you extend your hand upwards until you are above the fracture; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the head only, then set that break even until it is in natural shape."
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	"And if the fracture is long or slants inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that the reduction of that fracture may be convenient."
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	"And once you have set it even, then put on a splint, then put on a stick or bone splint, and tighten the fracture so that it does not move; and support the place of the ribs until the joint is aligned."
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	"And command the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back."
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	"And if an inflamed boil appears,
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder; if it is broken, one must reset it according to one of two methods: either by taking a piece of coarse wood shaped like this:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie two joints with two ropes and hang them up high, then have the patient sit on one seat; then break his arm against the wood until it reaches the elbow pit and is in between a wooden curve, then weigh it down with something heavy that the minister pulls down; then place the break evenly in your hands together so the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is to prop up the patient on their bed and have them hold their hand at their neck; then command two ministers such that one pulls the part above the break towards him while the other pulls the lower part downwards, each one stretching in his respective direction.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction should be stronger, then hold the ligature below the fracture and above it, and extend each of the assistants to their respective places.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, you must place one ligature in the middle below the hip, and another towards the thigh, below the fracture; likewise, if the fracture is towards the thigh, then you should place the ligature lightly without force, until the fracture is even on its place and level with the thigh, then set the bone correctly, as it should be, and hold it steady, so that no swelling occurs.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if splints come loose, do not tighten it up to 27 days and place moist linen on the elbow pit and rose oil so that the inflammation subsides; then tighten it, and the way to tighten it is as follows: put the bandage on the break, then assemble the arm on the support, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast; then place the cloth and tighten it on the support and on the arm so that the arm is in line with the stars, unless something prevents it or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you suspect that the bone is not setting properly, use stars and place a larger and stronger star on the break with two spaces between each star; each star should be large enough to extend three fingers beyond the break on either side. Then tighten it onto the stars as I described at the beginning of this chapter for the break, tightening more firmly but without stretching out too much.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the swelling and redness as we have described in the time that you reset the broken limb, and you suspect a hot abscess, leave it bound for seven days, as we have said; then look at each ligature every three days to ensure that no itching or inflammation comes to the place where nourishment cannot reach the member because the binding is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the hip joint, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, then untie it after three days or more, and let the patient lie on their back with their hands on their stomach; place one pillow full of wool evenly under the shoulder joint, and watch each hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move or soften the ligaments. Then treat the hip joint with medicine, and give them the food we mentioned earlier in such a manner that at first it is subtle; but as they begin to recover, make it thicker.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset forty days later; then untie it, give baths and ointment medications to put them back in place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, let it remain dislocated for forty days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Here is an English translation of the French text about the treatment of a broken arm:
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, called the "fossicles," one of which is small, that guides the thumb; the other is large, located below it near the little finger. Sometimes only the large fossicle breaks, or sometimes only the small one does, but occasionally both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bone is broken, restoration is easy, and healing; but when the large one is broken, healing is difficult, and more painful than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, it should be gently straightened and aligned.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if the large bone is broken, it should be pulled harder; and placed on the pillow, with the thumb of the hand higher than the other fingers, and the little finger lower than the others, and the patient crossed over themselves, with the pillow raised in front to prevent any strain. Then extend the minister's arm below the patient's hand or elbow, and another minister above at the other shoulder.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then the doctor should set it straight according to its natural shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, place each one in its proper place; and if there is any misplaced piece that touches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut it off and remove the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a wound along with the fracture, I spoke about it in the chapter on wounds; take care accordingly.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if swellings appear at the beginning of restoration, then apply a bandage made of rose oil and white wax cloth that is not too hard or too soft, and tie it gently until the swelling is eased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerote, and place the emplaustre of the powder of mill with abundant egg. Then place the stones, and let the breaking stone be always stronger, and a little larger than the others; and know that it must have six stones in the arm in various dispositions: whether the breaker is in one of the bones or two; and press more above the breaker than elsewhere, and always less when moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are on the breaker be soft and moist, and not hard nor harsh; and let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the bandage after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must wash the limb with warm water until those itches are appeased; and let the limb rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then recommences the stretching, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, adjust it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if care is taken that the healing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a little and leave it like that for some days until the healing reaches it, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not untie him for up to 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or whoever is around, then let him raise his hands to his neck, and keep them even, and guard against movement and shaking off, and sleep on his back; and know that this dislocation can be restored in 30 days or in 35, and perhaps in 20, according to the compositions and temperaments of the humors.
de la brisure de la main	Chapter 18: On the Fracture of the Hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and on our elbows there are few fractures, and only then do they occur frequently.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or dislocated, then it is necessary for the patient to sit cross-legged, and sit upright facing straight ahead; then he places his hand on a flat surface, and the surgeon extends the broken bones and aligns them correctly until they are well joined together; and applies a plaster bandage and splints if necessary, then places a roller according to the size of the area; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is on the inside of the palm near the wrist, then a splint made of cloth is created and the patient is instructed to apply it to their broken palm; then it is wrapped with a long cloth strip, and the roller should be soft and as large as the palm of the hand, and it is wrapped in such a way that it fits properly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, then a roller should be placed on top of it and another underneath in the palm so that the hand is open and straight, then wrap everything around the hand tightly and secure the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in any of the fingers, if it's the thumb, then align it properly and wrap it with the palm, and if you see fit place a small straight roller to hold up the fracture so that it does not move; and if the fracture is in another finger, such as the index or one of the others, then align it and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after it; or bind them all together in one bandage, whichever seems best, or place a roller on top like on the thumb; and be careful about heat and inflammation, and treat anything hot that arises, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Fracture of the thighbone
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The thighbone is often fractured and it can be seen when it twists forward or backward, and the treatment for this is to apply one bandage above the fracture and another below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their back, then each assistant extends their bandage to their respective side evenly, and this is done when the fracture is in the bone itself.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the dislocation is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ligaments should be towards the little finger, and the other ligament under the dislocation.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be by the knee, and let the extension be below; then let the physician place the bone even with both hands, until it is according to its natural shape, and then put on the splint, and the bandage, if no inflammation comes.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is heat and inflammation, allow it to subside first before returning to your work and treatment; the bandages are applied in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap a hard double bandage of two or three layers around the fracture, and let it remain there to absorb any excess fluid. Then twist the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the hip and the leg, near the knee joint from below, and bring the ends of the thread up above; then wrap the bandage around the leg and hip again, place splints on the fracture, and place one splint on the bone of the leg. Then fill the empty space between the leg and hip with soft cloth strips to ensure even pressure, then begin tying tightly three or four times around the fracture; as you tie higher up on the fracture, tie more loosely. Then take the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the leg and hip, and tie them together with three splints that are above, then return down to the bottom end of the thread until you reach the foot, and tie it so that it does not move from its place. Then leave it like that until no inflammation or other sign appears.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if inflammation occurs, remove the bandages and treat what has appeared, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that stick out, it is necessary to remove them if possible; and if not, it is necessary to cut open the space and draw out pus; then continue treatment until the patient is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thighbone is fractured in such a way that rollers are applied to it, as in the case of the elbow and arm; however, with this type of treatment, the patient does not limp.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thighbone is healed in about one month or a little less or more, depending on the variety of temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Ligamentous injury of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then it is no more than a crack or hole, and this happens to every wound, and without wound, which everyone feels.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is to align what has shifted on its sides until it is assembled as much as possible, then apply plaster and place a round roller if necessary, and tighten as needed, then follow all the procedures that we have said for other fractures, such as heat inflammation and other signs; treat each situation with what is appropriate until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Fractures of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is rightly called «mustelz», and the other «foscile». And there can be complete breaking like in the arm, and for this reason, the setting is similar to that of the arm, and the work is all done. And if the two bones break together, then the leg twists in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fibula is broken, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, great pain is felt and it is clearly visible; it also turns under itself
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore arrange for an extension and place it evenly, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly and there are many pieces, then the extension should be lesser and lighter; and lighten according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"After completing your task, take two strips of wood and wrap them around the leg on both sides, from the knee downwards. Then wrap two layers of bandage over and under these strips, tie it in the middle so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left. This is well done. Some people also use a splint made of wood the length of the leg to prevent movement, especially if there is an open wound at the fracture site. Move the leg every day to check for any signs of heat, infection, or other complications. Continue this care until it is fully healed."
de la brisure des os dou piet	"Of the fracture of the bones of the foot"
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	To the ankle there is no fracture,
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	"And if there is fracture of the foot bones, and you see these bones projecting over one another, then place that patient's foot on the ground, as if they were about to walk, and then place your foot upon theirs where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places; then apply a splint and bandages, and place beneath the stomach of the foot a small table with two heads, then bind it securely, and wrap it with cloths and other necessary items."
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	"And when three or four days have passed, undo the bandages, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they were broken or dislocated."
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	"And if there are any broken toes, set them straight as we have said for the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint along the length of the broken toe and make it slightly wider; then place beneath the foot that small table which I mentioned earlier, and bind it securely. If two or three, or more than three, toes are broken, then place on each toe a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and secure the table underneath the foot; let them be placed upon the top of the table so that they may support the arch of the foot."
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	"And remember not to forget the other things that I have mentioned for other fractures, and treat each case according to what is appropriate."
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	"Regarding the fracture of the wrist bone"
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, make her sit wide-legged, then lean her towards the back part, and have her held from behind. Then fill the space in her nature with cotton, as much as one stone. Then stand up the woman, lifting her back bit by bit, until the cotton comes to the entrance of her nature, and the bone returns with the stone. And when she wishes to piss, remove the cotton, and once she has pissed, replace it. Do this for about seven days: thus the break will be restored. If you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie a tube at its opening, and put the whole bladder inside her nature. Then blow into the tube forcefully until the bladder swells within. Her nature will then return to normal. Then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for some days until she is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the little finger of man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the thigh; and these breaks are not hidden from those who apply their study and practice here, and read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break indicates many ways to correctly restore it: listen therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	"When the penis is broken, take a goose neck and insert it into the penis. Then wrap cloths around it and leave it like this for three days or thereabouts, and it will heal quickly."
de brisure avec plaie	"Regarding fractures with wounds"
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	He who has a fracture with wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, should have his wound cleaned immediately, so that the stitches we have mentioned may testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then apply a dressing of vitriol, if you have none other, and then begin to reset the fracture in the same hour or on the same day, unless some obstacle arises.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if some obstacle arises, then leave the reduction until a new day, until the inflammation is subdued, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, lest you bring on an evil complication.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears above the exposed heart, it is necessary that you place it at ease quickly with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not sufficient for you to place it evenly with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which is twenty or twenty-eight inches long and has a width according to the size of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four, depending on what is needed in each case of fracture; and let it be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your operation, and let it be pointed at the front and thicker in the middle forward like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," therefore the curved head should be placed on the visible bone end; and push once until it returns, ensuring they are even with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and tools cannot grip the bone well, then you must cut off the head of the bone until tools can grasp it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, then use a suitable instrument such as the incision knife or the bone cutter with all your strength; then reset that which remains in the bone by scraping off its roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset but the patient still feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	So ensure it is in its proper place, then moisten a cloth with black stiptic wine and apply it if it is summer; do not put cerote or other oily substances on the wound, as this will cause rotting. Then apply bandages once you have reset the bone, leave the wound open, and cut away the skin around it according to the size of the wound. Be careful that the wound does not become constricted with the fracture; many foolish doctors have done this and caused harm or death to patients. Let the bandage be softer and gentler than for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that ill will come of it, as we have said, and you find pain in that place, then one must not put on bandages; but wrap around tightly with hard cloths instead.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after two or three days that the wound is healing, then remove what you had put on previously and apply healing ointment to it, such as tetraformacon ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dress the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is sound and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bowels can pass downward easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and it still cannot heal but the bowels become obstructed again, know that there are small bone fragments causing this pain. Therefore, you must open the wound with a tent, and remove all these unwanted fragments that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula appears in the place, or another type of corruption, then you must treat it according to what is said in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and opens up on the limb, such as the thighbone or armbone, and other similar ones in large limbs, then do not pull it out, for many die from this. But let it rot until after twenty or thirty days, perhaps it will fall out by itself later. Then treat the wound if you can; but if you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	And of fractures that come upon the union
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times fractures come upon the union after it has healed, especially when they are near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural movements.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore beware if the nail is fresh: you must administer stypptic medicines such as aloes, frankincense, myrrh, sarcocolle, aconite, and similar others. So take some of these things or all together, and mix them with stypptic wine or with egg yolk or with axle grease; then put them on the nail in poultices and bind it tightly, and do not untie it for many days; then remove it and begin another one until the nodule is removed. Or you may bind a well-made piece of lead upon it, for the property of lead is to draw out all swellings from the limbs. And if the nodule has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut it open on top and remove the excess that appears. Or have it removed by some barber until it is gone, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the limb that is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone has been reset and afterward the limb remains weak and feeble, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been. Or because there were too many bindings, and nourishment could not reach the limb. Or because of too much restraining. Or because of too great movements, not at the proper time. Or because there is little blood in the body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is to make the sick person eat well and exercise his body until blood increases in him. And administer baths, and give him joy and happiness. Then put pitch on the limb so that it attracts great nourishment to it, and apply warm water compresses often until nourishment reaches the limb, and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Of the limb that is crooked after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration,
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the dislocation is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And arrange gentle movement of the limb each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	"And if the tortuosity is worn out and hardened, like stone, and it needs to be removed by iron, then one must cut all the way down to the bone with a fine, light-bladed scalpel. And use caution and skill in this procedure."
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	"Here begins the book of dislocations."
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	"Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its proper place, preventing it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient."
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	"If dislocation occurs in anyone, it must be immediately reduced without delay."
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	But if one delays, the place swells and perhaps will not be reset properly. Therefore, it is not good to move it while it is swollen: many times it brings about spasms and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient bleed, then leave him until the inflammation has subsided; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and cure each limb as it comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	"And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from head to foot."
des mandibules	"of the jawbone(s)"
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	"It sometimes happens that the jawbones are dislocated inward, and their dislocations occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their proper place and softened somewhat; or else they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the chin, causing saliva to flow out of the mouth so that it cannot be held in, nor can the mouth be closed, and the tongue becomes entwined with speech."
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	"If the dislocation is slight, it returns on its own through various manipulations."
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you must quickly reset it without delay; and in such a manner that the assistants hold the head of the patient, and the master places his clenched fist from one hand at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is two-sided; and let the other two hands be free to press evenly; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	"And the doctor places it back into its proper place until it returns."
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	"And if the dislocation returns suddenly, especially if both jawbones have been dislocated together, then bathe them in warm water and oil until they can be gently manipulated without delay, as we have said."
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes well without softening, then place moistened cloths made from a mixture of rose oil and wax on top, then bind it lightly with soft linen; and let the patient sleep on their back, with both shoulders supported between two pillows so that they do not move either to the right or left, nor try to chew, but take only light food until the pains are gone and the jaws are healed. Then he may eat what he wants easily, and need not strain himself opening his mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is well healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	"And if the two jawbones cannot be properly reduced within an hour and are not returned to their proper place, then fever and chills will ensue, sometimes with diarrhea, and occasionally with vomiting of bile."
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	"And when you see these symptoms, know that it is a loss [of life]; for many people who suffer from them die within eight days."
de la forcelle	"of dislocation of the jawbone at the angle"
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	"The angle [of the jaw] cannot be dislocated towards the cheek from within and from below the chin, but sometimes it can be dislocated backwards, which is easily felt."
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient should often lie on their back and extend their arms; then press firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place. Then place the emplastrum and bandage there, and bind it tightly; and the shoulder towards the side cannot dislocate again; if it does, reset it as we have said; then replace the emplastrum and bandage, and bind it tightly, and tell the patient to rest until they are healed. The same is done for the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	"of dislocation of the shoulder blade"
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder dislocates only in three ways: one is that it dislocates towards the lower part of the hip; and the second is towards the breastbone; and rarely dislocates upwards, which happens little; and it does not dislocate backwards due to the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inwardly for the nerves; and often dislocates downward towards the hip, especially those who have little flesh, as it quickly jumps out; while those with enough flesh hardly jump out and rarely return.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	"Sometimes, however, some men suffer a blow or a fracture and the shoulder becomes inflamed with heat, causing them to believe that it has been dislocated."
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	"It is therefore necessary for you to examine him until you are certain [of the diagnosis]; and then begin the treatment."
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that dislocations are recognized when they occur downwards towards the hip, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, which you will find clearly manifested between them; and you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and below the hip where you touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their side nor move in any way; and similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly by touching it; and this manner of dislocation is difficult to reduce, especially when it is recent or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	"The method is for the practitioner to lift the patient's hand upwards, then place his fingers below the glenoid cavity and forcefully elevate the joint upwards into its proper place while the practitioner lifts the arm and extends it upwards; it will slip back quickly."
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said within several days after, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the plaster applied should be softening and soothing, like a decoction of marshmallow, fennel seed, and melilot in water, and the plaster applied. Then the patient should lie on their back, and place underneath the shoulder blade an even pillow made of wool, not too soft or too hard. The surgeon then places his heel on the pillow and gently lifts the head of the shoulder joint, pulling the patient's arm; another assistant holds the patient's head so that it does not move downwards. When this shoulder is now fully relocated, you should check if you have reset it correctly following this method: Ensure that there is a man present who is taller than the patient. He should stand directly facing the side, and place his shoulder underneath the patient's shoulder blade, lifting the shoulder blade upwards so that the patient hangs from the arm; another assistant pulls the patient's arm downwards towards the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, hang some heavy object with him, and the dislocation will return.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the reset is also done in another way: and one takes a long stick and sticks it into the ground, such that its head is as high as a man's fist, but not too thick or too thin; then it is placed under the patient, but with soft cloths underneath, and the patient stands on the long end of the wood; then their hand is extended downwards on the other side properly, and the joint will quickly return to its place. And if it does not want to return despite all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a stick two spans wide and four fingers thick, which has a round head for easy insertion deep into the ass's tail, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie cloths under the head of the stick so that the stick does not hurt the patient; then place it under the armpit of the patient; and extend his arm along the length of the stick, and tie the sling to the stick, and the bandage at the top of the hand, then place the arm on one end of a board of similar width, and let the hand hang down, and leave the body hanging down on the other side: the joint will now return.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, however it may be, then place under the armpit a wisp of wool; then put on the emplaster made with flour powder, with incense and egg yolk all around the shoulder, then wrap it tightly under the armpit, and twist the bandage onto the plaster, and bind the hand to its collar, and let the hand remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And he should eat little until the member is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly; and afterwards he may eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has been forced out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for some other reason, then you must administer cauteries with three openings, as it is described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and after twenty days the joint does not stay in place, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut, stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the breast and nipples, or behind, is caused by a push or stretching of the hands, and another bandage should be applied; and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing there comes pain in the member and slowness of movement, then the patient should often apply hot compresses until that pain is alleviated and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	About dislocation of the elbow
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the elbow joint is dislocated inwards and returns inwards, and it is dislocated from all sides, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not concealed because one can see and feel it well, and it is dislocated according to each type of figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick shoulder with the healthy one, so you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder completely
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you should reduce it before an abscess forms there, for if an abscess forms, it will be difficult to reduce, and perhaps it cannot be completely reduced, especially when it is behind; such dislocations are worse than others and cause greater pain, and sometimes gangrene occurs.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the reduction is when it can be reduced in such a way that you extend his hand with both your hands; and spread his arm, and place your hands on the elbow from above, below and around, and press the joint against the wrist or the root of the palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he folds his hand towards his hand and presses the elbow that is dislocated against the root of the palm.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and indeed two assistants extend the arm, and hold it steady with two hands so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm on each side, then when you have wrapped a doubled cloth long and wide around it; and when the physician has joined the joint in his hand, then he anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then pushes the joint forcibly until it returns; and when it is in its place, then put a dry bandage on with egg yolk, and bind it firmly, and suspend the arm around the patient's neck, and leave it there for several days, then untie it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, then untie the bandage and leave it. And if you see that the joint is not quite firm, then start again with the plaster and the bandage, leaving it on for several days until it is well secured, then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if it feels cramped after the joint is reset and it moves, then bathe it and rub it gently, and press until it becomes relaxed; or you put on the joint a poultice of fatty mutton, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, if you rub the joint moderately, then replace the poultice, and then enter the bath; and do this twice or three times until it is healed; and if you see that, then put on a warm moist compress of wheat flour with butter, and bind it on; so it will return to its normal state.
li dislocation de la main	hand dislocations
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint is easily dislocated and its reduction is also easy compared to other joints. Therefore it must be reduced as soon as possible, before the place becomes swollen or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is thus: you place the sick hand on a table, and the servant extends it, and the physician places his hand over it evenly, so that he places his palm upon the joint's surface, and presses until it returns to its original position. Then you must ensure that it is properly in place; afterward, the patient places the back of their hand on a table for extension and reset.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient places their backhand on the table, and the physician places his hand over its joint surface.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that's good. If not, then apply plasters with soothing poultices until it rests without beginning again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot tolerate it, and you cannot set it right after several days, then the joint remains dislocated; causing no further harm to the patient unless the hand becomes lame and unable to grasp anything. Then know that the nerves or arteries are cut. There is no other cure but to cauterize nearby with a hot iron, and sometimes nothing else helps.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	"And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and let it remain so."
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if he cannot move it well, and there is any stiffness, then apply warm water and rub until it is smooth."
de la dislocation des dois de la main	"Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	The fingers of the hand are dislocated at each joint, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the wrist; therefore, reduce the dislocation towards your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the finger and tilt it towards the side where it is dislocated; leave it for two days, then make it even on that day; and on the third day, tie it with a splint as we have described, and on the fourth day, remove the splint and move it, and reapply the splint; do this frequently until it becomes stable. Do likewise if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, doing so until it is healed. And do similarly when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	"Regarding the dislocation of the heel bone of the back"
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	"When the heel bone of the foot or leg is dislocated, or when there are multiple dislocations, there is no treatment for this, as the damage is already done."
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign is that the evacuations come out unwillingly and cannot be held back, and many times some member becomes limp, such as both thighs or both arms, or it moves in four parts; that which moves at the rear is called "gilbositez": its cure is that if gilbositez has come from childhood, then there is no cure nor healing for it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from a fall or impact or similar causes, the ancient ones prescribed remedies with great words, but not all were beneficial. However, I have summarized it according to my intention and formed tools in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the condition called 'gilbositeit' which affects the front of the chest, none has any healing. And likewise that which comes directly to both sides, and only one who knows properly can cure it when it comes to the back; as I say. And let the patient be laid down evenly on his face, with something underneath him so he does not bruise himself. Then stick one stake at the head firmly into the ground, and another at the feet, and bind a rope around the ankles of the patient, another at the hips, knees, and ankles; and two assistants should hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes. Let them be well secured, as we have said, and the physician place his palms firmly on the spine until it yields.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, then take a board of three long arms, and place it under the skin, and have the patient lie on their side, and put the head of the board under the skin, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and let the physician put his feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly until it returns to its place. And if you wish, do this for the turned one that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you plant two stakes at the head of the patient's arm, one large and two smaller ones towards the feet, and between each stake, above and below, there should be a span of space; and in each stake there should be a hole where the dislocation occurs, and the stakes should be firmly planted in the ground so that they do not move. And between each pair of stakes there should be one turning stake on which the linen bandage turns, and two small stakes of one span long for turning the dislocation. Then tie the bandage that is among the stakes to the dislocation towards the head, and the other bandage towards the feet at the other dislocation, and each minister should turn his stake with all the bandages, and the master shall make the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is even, place a dry plaster with plenty of egg, then the lint, then the iron bar of three fingers' length, which holds down the place of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until they are healed; and if anything comes at the end of the healing, then administer softening and soothing medicines with the iron bar that we mentioned before; sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; but this is the bone that appears, therefore one should not be presumptuous: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	"Dislocations of the hip joint"
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	"Know that the hip and shoulder joints only have dislocations, unlike other joints. The hip joint is unstable in four ways: internally and externally, and anteriorly and posteriorly. It is more unstable internally than elsewhere, and somewhat less stable anteriorly and posteriorly."
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the sign of its dislocation within is that when one joins the patient's leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee opens more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee in the fire; and the place that is nearby swollen with a hot abscess is because the hip bone has come there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	"And the sign of external hip dislocation is that these accidents are opposite to those mentioned earlier."
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	"And the sign of anterior hip dislocation is that the leg appears well-formed, but the knee cannot be bent without pain. If one tries to make the person walk, they cannot do so and hold back their urine. The ankle swells, and when they walk, they limp on the heel."
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	"And the sign of posterior hip dislocation is that the knee cannot be extended or bent, and the leg appears shorter than the other one. The ankle is relaxed, and the thighbone is located below the ribs."
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	"The treatment for this condition resembling hip dislocation is to examine whether the dislocation is old or new. If it is old and has healed in its displaced position, then there is no treatment for it. One should not attempt to reduce such a dislocation, as doing so could cause harm."
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	"For those hip dislocations that are fresh and occur in four ways (internal, external, anterior, and posterior), one should quickly reduce the dislocation using traction either internally or externally, and then move it to the right or left. If reduced correctly, no further treatment is necessary."
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong helper, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or one helper who is bound above the knee; and another helper extends his hand over it in such a way that he places his hands under the buttocks, then pulls him gently by a soft rope attached to the hip; and another helper holds the head of the rope; and all extend simultaneously up and down until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common for four members, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	But if not, then you must treat its appearance when the dislocation is at the shoulder, so that you raise the patient onto his healthy side, then place the rope on the root of the hip, and the place below the angle, then pull the rope upwards towards the angle, and towards the forearm; then another helper takes his arms, embraces the large bone of the sick hip, and extends it forcefully outwards: now it will return to its place. And this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tie it in the manner that we have described, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a soft strong bond on both heels and knees, and let the affected leg extend two spans more than the other; then hang him from the top of a pole, and let him be two arm-lengths above the ground; then command one minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister hang with the patient, embracing firmly the hip, for now the joint returns swiftly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the thigh, then let the patient lie down as we have described for one with gout, and bind the rope tightly on the affected leg properly and also on the foot; then place two brands, one at the head and one at the feet, and then drive a brand between the thighs of the patient in this manner; and have moist rags ready around so that the patient does not blister, then each minister extend towards him, and the doctor put his hand evenly on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place a stone on it, and press it as we have said in the chapter on gibbosity (kyphosis), with the patient lying on the sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	"And when the dislocation is anterior, then one must extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and let the physician place his pain on the affected angle of the hip, then press with the other hand, extending towards the knee."
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it is not necessary to extend the patient downwards or lift them up from the ground. Rather, they should lie as if the hip were dislocated at the front, just like we have described in childbirth over two hips; and they should be on their back, with the linen spread out as we have said earlier, and the joint should be pressed upon the table. And it will be ready when the patient extends their legs and they are even; then join the thighs together, place the splint, and tie it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let them rest for three or four days, then untie it and replace the splint on it. If you see that they are even, then tie it as before, and leave it for three days. Then untie it, and let them go gradually until the member is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	"The kneecap can be dislocated in three ways: inside and outside, and behind; it does not dislocate in front."
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend their leg at their hip, and if it does not articulate with their hip, know that it is dislocated. And the reduction of this [dislocation] is that you make the patient sit upright, extend their leg if they can, place your back on their face, and put their foot on yours; then take their knee in your palms, draw it between your thighs, then strongly flex both sides of the knee; and another assistant extends their foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that the leg articulates lightly with the hip; and apply the plaster there, fix the leg to the hip, and keep them bound tightly for three or four days, then untie them; and the patient should not walk until the member is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not yet straight, then extend it strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is straight.
de la dislocation dou talon	Dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	"The heel is sometimes twisted and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward."
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and it tents forward at the part where it is dislocated; the reduction should be easy, and one should gently extend it with both hands when it is merely moved.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, then you should make the patient sit upright, and have your assistants pull on the leg above the ankle with both hands; then draw the foot towards yourself with your right hand twice, then with your left hand twice, then lift it up and gently place the foot back into its proper position. Do this twice as described, drawing and placing the foot; if it stays in place, that's good; but if not, start over again because it has moved out of place once more. And if it still cannot be put back in place like this, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly plant a stake in the ground between their thighs, and wrap cloth around it so it doesn't injure the patient. Then have one assistant hold onto the thigh, and another extend the foot with both hands or bind it to the neck of the foot; then each assistant should pull evenly, and the stake should always be between the patient's thighs to hold them steady when you lift them up. Finally, the surgeon himself should gently put the dislocation back in place with his hands, while one assistant holds onto the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return to its proper position.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is complete, then place the plaster and bandages on top, apply pressure strongly, tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are behind the ankle joint so that the binding is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, then apply pressure; then remove it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if they walk before this time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if inflammation comes afterwards, then you must calm it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed."
des dois	about the elbows
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	"When the elbows are dislocated, they should be gently reduced without force, and this is an easy thing to do."
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any nut of the back of the foot, then you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on two boards so that they are completely upright, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press strongly with your foot until it returns to its place; and when it is even, and nothing opens anymore, then place under the sole of the foot a board with two legs, then apply pressure strongly, and leave it for three days, then remove it; and make them rest until they are healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	About wounds and dislocations at the same time
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and you wish to reset it, many times the patient dies: so be not presumptuous in its treatment unless you are wise in the art and have long used it, and are compassionate and cautious, not hasty; and at first use things that cool an inflamed boil, and leave the patient in God's hands if there is no hope of healing; but when there is hope, then reset the limb to its place before the hot boils come; and once the limb is in place, administer things that cool an inflamed boil, and dress the wound with drying ointments as it should be done; and if bones are broken or small bones dislocated, set them and do what we have said for simple fractures; and guard against fear entering your way, according to what I have said, for this avails you more according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your armor and body.
Amen	Amen
