O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, dearest sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the knowledge of medicine together with its fulfillment, and have finished it through its explanations and interpretations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And I saw in a vision that you should complete this with the treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is greatly neglected in our region and has been entirely abandoned everywhere, therefore its science is lost and scattered, and there remains nothing except small descriptions about it in books moved by hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this have come error and vanity, thoughts are closed off, and the science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	But it seems to me that I want to revive this together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation and interpretation and abbreviation; and I will also include the shapes of cautery irons and other tools for the work with their explanations and preparations as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters of hands in our time, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And whoever undertakes this must rise to the knowledge of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgement of members, their shapes and connections and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of joints, and the movement and location of moving and resting veins.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hippocrates said that a name without a deed is much, but with the deed it is little; and this is especially true in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not familiar with what has been said before should guard against falling into error and killing people, just as I have seen many times those who undertake this science but abandon it through lack of knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish physician who cut off an ulcer from the neck of a woman and cut the arteries of the neck, so that so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another physician who removed a stone from the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; but he took with it a piece of the bladder wall, and the man died three days later.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for to remove it, and saw the state of the sick man and the size of the stone, and knew well that if he cut him he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another physician who took in charge one of our dukes who had his leg broken, and with the breaking there was also a wound. And the doctor, full of ignorance, tied the break over the wound with strong bandages, and did not leave any linen on the wound, and left him like that for some time. And he commanded that it should not be untied, and so the leg became completely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come and untie the leg; and when I had loosened it, he felt at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the pathways were already corrupted in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop progressing through the member until the whole limb was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another physician who opened an engrained ulcer and then burned it with the wickedness of his skill.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when a chancre is purified from melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all the corrupted matter can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, that which involves danger in many situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Why you should guard yourself so that foolish physicians cannot speak ill of you. Take up your weapons in caution and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, using the best way so that through God's grace you achieve salvation and are praised; leave fearful diseases to harsh healing, and remove your weapons from those who cause you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may reach the other world of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galien says in some of his teachings: "Do not take on difficult illnesses for treatment lest you be called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about cauteries of fire and cauteries with medicated water, and it is arranged from the head down to the feet. It includes the shapes of instruments and implements for cautery, and all that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, bloodletting cups, wounds, extraction of splinters, and similar things. It includes the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twistings, and similar things. It is arranged from the head down to the feet, with the shapes of instruments included.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you about the qualities of each temperament and their benefits and harms.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest and most subtle part of this science, and its secret responses. Many wise men have spoken about it, and they agree on these things. But I will keep my words short, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally all temperaments where there is matter, except for two: namely, the hot and dry temperament without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	Some authors have divided the hot and dry temperament with matter into two parts. Some say that cautery is of great help in this temperament, while others say that cautery is not useful for illnesses caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat hot diseases with heat or dryness; and he who says otherwise claims that cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases that come into the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you compare the body and moisture of man to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it several times by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And moreover, let no one meddle therein who has not tried it and who knows not well the treatise of cauteries by long usage, and the diversity of the temperaments of men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the relapses and the seasonableness of the time; we fear not concerning other temperaments, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors assembled and agreed upon cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, son, that cautery of fire together is among the secrets of healing and has greater efficacy than cautery with a medicinal fire.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not go forth from one member to another unless it be called forth, nor injures any other member if none call for it.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Warm medicines flow from member to member, causing severe diseases in the affected limb; but sometimes fire, due to its intensity and goodness of its nature, does not do this if there is excessiveness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and through the length of service and study that I have put into this art, and it is upon the truth of things. And therefore I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to deprive you of the secret which belongs to fire and the quality of the work, how it drives out diseases from bodies, as philosophers say in demonstrating; now receive these thoughts into your mind.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	Know, son, that they agreed upon the time when cauteries should be made and chose priests.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable in all seasons because the evils which occur are overcome thereby with the help of cautery; especially if the cauteries are necessary and urgent for pains which cannot await the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as foolish doctors do; for the disease which is healed by cautery has no relapse. And they say thus: but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicines that alter the temperament and dry up the humors which cause pain, and they are worth more than medicines because of their speed in action, their power, and their sovereignty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that sometimes disease comes according to the temperament of the sick person and the place of the disease and its power. And superfluities are gathered together in him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in a place where there are few superfluities and moisture, such as those for toothache and similar diseases, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth anything after medicines, because their intentions are mistaken, and cauteries are called the last resort of medicine because when we have administered various treatments for some disease and they do not work, then we apply cauteries, and they are effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries of gold are milder than those of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its high substance. They said that the place of cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true, for I have tested it and found that it is true in some people. And cauteries of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	Moreover, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot enough because of the color of the gold, and it soon cools down. And if it is heated too much, it will melt in the fire, and there are many inconveniences to this method.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use iron cauteries which we have prepared more appropriately for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have arranged this chapter from head to foot so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	About olive-cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two kinds of it which are made:
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is thus: the patient should be cleansed by a dissolving medicine that softens the head for three or four nights, according to what the virtue and age and habit of the patient can tolerate. Then perform the cautery behind the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Next, make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, with their hands resting on their knees. Then place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their two eyes; where your middle fingers meet is where you should apply the cautery called "olivary," as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place it on the designated ink mark, and move your hand downwards and outwards little by little while twisting. Then raise your hand gently, and examine the mark to see if you can see the bone – just a little bit of it. If not, resume cauterizing until you do see the bone as I have told you. Next, take some flax, dampen it, wrap it in soft cotton, place it on the wound, and let it stay for three days. Then apply warm linen soaked in butter, leaving it on until the scab has fallen off. Afterwards, treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrapharmacon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And as the ancients said, the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges itself; therefore, this treatment aids in that manner.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	Some of these people also say that the cautery should be kept on until part of the bone is burned. Then remove what has been burned from the bone and dress the wound to heal it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	Some others say that one should keep the cautery on until it burns away a piece of bone as large as a hazelnut, so that the humors can flow out freely. The wound should then be left open for an extended period before being dressed and healed.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	But I do not consider these two methods of cautery to be entirely good. They may be appropriate for certain people who are very afraid. However, I believe that in most cases, it is better to leave the wound alone because the flesh becomes weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we observe in other parts of the body. Therefore, in my opinion, the first application of cautery is more beneficial and gentle. That is the method I generally use.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Here begins the chapter on the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the head suffers from chronic and long-lasting pain, the sick person should use electuaries called "cochiae," as well as purgatives for the head, oils, and plasters. If cauterization is performed using the method we described earlier without success.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be careful if the patient's flesh is of strong nature and not too cold; in this case, you can cauterize using a little bit less heat than what we mentioned earlier.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Then perform cauterization on each of the patient's horns up to the bone, as we mentioned earlier. Also, perform one cautery on the spot called "vessel" where cupping glasses are placed. Be careful not to burn too deeply – the patient will feel more pain from this cautery than from the others. The cauteries on the horns should be gentler than those on the middle of the head, and here is how it's done:
dou cautere dou chief	"For the cautery of the head,"
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	"If sudden pain comes in one part of the head and extends to the eye, and the head is purged with medicines that remove impurities, and other treatments mentioned in the division of diseases have been performed but do not help: then cauterization should be done in two ways, namely using hot medicine or fire."
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	"For cauterization using hot medicine: Take an almond seed, remove its skin and crush it into two parts; then make a hole in the temple where the pain is felt such that you can place the almond seed underneath the skin. Then tie it tightly with string and leave it for twelve hours. After this time, untie it and rub the almond seed with garlic oil, leaving the wound open for two or three days. Then apply a cotton pad soaked in butter until it sticks out of the wound."
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	"After treating with ointment until healed, if you see fit to apply any burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines."
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery follows this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of which this is the shape
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	"And it is called 'closed' because the head of the cautery tool is shaped like a cloak with a slight curvature on one side and a small protrusion in the middle. Place it on the painful spot and turn the fire gently so that half of the diameter of the heart is burned, but do not let your hand touch the artery, which is located further away from the skin. Then lift your hand to prevent the blood vessels from burning excessively."
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	"After that, apply cotton soaked in saffron water to the wound for three days. Then apply cotton moistened with butter and continue treating the wound with ointment until it heals. If you wish to cauterize this migraine using a cautery tool called 'cultellare', which has a sharp point, be careful not to cut into the old artery in this migraine."
de emigraine	"of migraine"
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	"If when treating migraine as we have previously described in the section on dividing diseases, you find that it is not improving and that the cauteries made of medicine and iron do not help, then you must heat the cautery tool called 'cultellare' until it turns white. Then press down firmly with one line of half an inch length on the painful spot, without cutting too deeply to avoid hitting the artery or bone. Be careful not to touch the jawbone that moves when chewing and make sure the nerve does not spasm causing paralysis of the face. Also be careful not to cause excessive bleeding from the artery once it is cut, especially if you are not experienced or practiced in this procedure. Leave the wound open halfway, but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut and show you where to find this information in this book."
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	"And if you find that these cauteries do not help the disease and the patient is suffering, then cauterize him on the head as we have described previously, and continue treating the wound until it heals. If you still see no improvement, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on artery extraction, using a tool with two blades; this cautery is better and more helpful than the previous one."
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	"on ear pain caused by coldness"
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When cold pain comes in the ear, and medicines are applied there, both soluble ones and other treatments mentioned in the division, but the pain does not decrease, then heat this cautery called "pointe":
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the cautery all around the affected ear, or around the two joints if pain is felt on both sides, then move it away a little from the root of the ear and mark the spot where you start. Apply ten points to each ear; afterwards, cleanse the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Only those tortures that move from the eye can be cured by cautery; those that come from heat and spasm of the nerves should not receive one.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that moves from the eye with eyewashes and head sprinklings and gargarisms, but it does not improve, then it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little beyond the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips. Place the cautery on the healthy part that is exposed, and make the cautery at the top of the ear just above the corner of the head, and another on the temple as long as one finger; leave the cautery until half of it has burned. This is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the appearance of the cautery that we have shown above, but it is a little more refined and the knife should be a little thicker. After cauterizing the area as I have said before, cleanse it until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement and the patient has no fever, then apply four cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the area called "vessels" as we have mentioned before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; cure it as we have said previously.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large syrups and pills made from Mondifia for the brain. Then raise the head of the patient completely, and place on the occiput the plaster of mustard that is written about in the treatise on plasters; perform it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is cured this way, that's good; but if not, apply three cauteries from the middle of the head down to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each cautery. Cure it as the others were, and if you see it joined together, and the patient is suffering, then apply one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, apply two more on the two corners of the head, and cure until it is healed. Use the cautery called "olivary" as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head must be cleansed with syrups and the things we have mentioned before. Then raise the head of the patient, apply a cautery in the middle of the head and on each corner, one behind and three on the spine of the neck; if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then apply four cauteries on the spine of the back. Leave it until half of the cautery has burned, then lift your hand. After that, cure until it is healed, using the cautery called "olivary" that we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not be cauterized with anything other than the flebotomistic cautery. First, cleanse the brain with syrups and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and suffers from taking medicines.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, then apply gargarisms and mastication that cleanses the brain frequently with good foods. Then raise the head in the middle, apply one cautery according to what we have said before, and another on the vessel, and on each corner; and if the patient is severe and suffering, then apply cauteries as I have said for paralysis and limpness of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, using the olivary cautery according to the manner that I have mentioned.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, apply one subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted moistures and thick blood, then cauterize with several cauteries as we have said for paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy there is a decline towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink by which the brain can be cleansed, according to what has been mentioned before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raising the head of the patient, make one twisted cord of well-made linen, like a circle, and place it on the head. The patient should sit cross-legged and be held firmly on all sides. Then present the linen bandage, melted with old sheep butter; heat it moderately over fire so that the patient can bear it when poured onto their head. Afterward, empty the circle inside the head and let it cool. Do this to the patient once a week with other good governance until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you wish to cauterize with it, make several points all along the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the brain more greatly; then place cotton dipped in butter and chicken fat on it.
de l’awe des eulz	of inflammation of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When inflammation first comes to the eyes with the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin by giving the patient something to drink that cleanses the head and keeps them from all moistures. Make them sweat or take baths several times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterward, have them raise their head, apply a cautery on the head, and apply two cauteries on the temples if the inflammation descends to both eyes together, or one if it is only in one eye. Cut all veins and arteries that are under the heart along the entire cautery, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple. Be careful not to cause bleeding, and if too much blood comes out, then stain it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	"And I will teach you about the extraction of arrows and how to incise cauterization, and how you should stretch it; and sometimes a cautery or caustic is applied beneath the two bones behind."
dou cors des larmes	"tear duct"
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When tears of the eyes are chronic and habitual and appear on veins, or near arteries that are visible at the forehead's surface, and it is seen that they are cold, watery superfluities, then apply the cautery as mentioned at the beginning: one cautery among the eyebrows descending towards the eyes; two cauteries above each temple; and two cauteries behind below the two bones. And if more are needed, cauterize along the eyebrow with small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	concerning the body's tears inside the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	But when you apply the medicines as we have said in the division and they do not help, then give the patient three ounces of hemp juice to drink. Afterwards raise his head, and cauterize him with an olive-shaped cautery at the middle of his forehead; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" above each eyebrow, a little below the eyebrows; but beware not to cut the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	"And this is the shape of the cautery called 'clavilis':"
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When paper is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the shape
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	"And if you see that you make two cauteries on the two eyelids as long as the eyelashes are, and do not leave your hand until one-third of the paper is burnt, according to the manner I have said."
dou poil qui point l’oil	"of the hair that protects the eye"
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	"Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes turn towards the partedens and prick the eye, and in this case cauteries are made in two ways: either with fire or with burning medicine."
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	"Or the cautery of fire commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their birth, he should restrain his eyes so that they do not move until they are born."
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	"When they are born and grown even, then the patient puts on his nightshirt. Afterwards he places on the paper of the eyes a figure that is like the full moon, with the beginning of the sign near the hairs; then he puts damp cotton in egg-white and musk-mallow on the eye, then he heats the cautery, which has this form:"
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	"After cauterizing on the figure you have marked little by little many times until the skin is burnt there; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper withdraw, and the hairs raised at the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put damp cotton in butter until the burning is gone; afterwards cure with ointment until it is healed."
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	"And if afterwards the hairs come again, and the paper is softened, then recommence the cautery on the same place as you have done first; and if the hairs are few, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye."
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	"The cautery of burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a form of parchment like the full moon. Then take three ounces each of soap of France and live wax, and grind them together well; and do it hastily so that it does not cool, then spread on the form that you have made like the full moon, and place it on the paper of the eyes; and if the patient has only one eye, one should operate on one, and if both, on both. And put damp cotton in egg-white under the eye; and let the skin of the patient be in his nightshirt and put your two fingers showing on the medicine, and press a little each time that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for he feels the biting like fire."
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	"When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger."
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the cauterization is complete, then raise the weight of water and see if you can lift the paper as if it were lifted by heat or incision; and if this is the case, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply more medicine on the weight where the medicine has not opened, until your work is even and your eyes are sharp; then place cotton dipped in butter until the heart burns have fallen; afterward treat the wound with the ointment called "diaphoresis" and others until it is clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must take great care in your work, ensure that no medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes moist and hairs prick in the eye, recommence the medication on that softened spot with clean paper as you did before; afterwards treat it until it is healthy; this is the form of the poultice for the eye.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	"And know that the eyes of people are diverse in size and smallness, and according to that make your constraints; and do not be satisfied with the right way for him who has the study of this art."
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Here is a translation of the text you provided about the treatment of fistulas using cautery:
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the section on diseases, and your treatment does not help, then you must perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Tell the patient to place their head on your hand. Then hold the patient's head with both of your hands so that it does not move or turn its head. Afterward, moisten cotton with egg white or onion juice and apply it to the eye. Next, heat the cautery instrument, which is shaped like a chicken feather, including the tip of the cautery. If you look closely, it should be pointed from one end to the other, resembling a tent. However, whichever shape suits your purpose will do.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing on the fistula if it is open to remove and dry out the pus, and if it is closed, then make an incision and draw out the bowel. Next, apply the heated cautery firmly onto it, keeping your hand on the handle of the cautery near the eye so that your hand does not slip. Insert the cautery into the fat around the eye and burn it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If at the beginning of cauterization, one reaches bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, recommence the cauterization once more, and if necessary, repeat it three times; afterwards, leave it for three days. Then apply cotton moistened in butter, and treat with a drying ointment until it is healed. If it has not healed after forty days, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow the chapter accordingly.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is also a method of cauterization for fistulas that some of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand first, then make an incision; afterwards insert into the opening a thin rod of this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they do it with the quantity of a half penny; and hold your hand firmly over the cauldron, and let not the patient move or twitch, lest the molten lead run into his eye; and one must put moistened cotton in the egg or water: the lead thus applied heals the fistulous ulcer marvelously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer a probe to the nose and bring the fistula back into its proper place in the body of the nose.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Cracks on the lips that are called "splits" occur very frequently, especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat one small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly in those cracks until it comes into contact with the flesh; afterward dress the wound with cerate until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the boil on the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When a boil comes at the root of the throat or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it becomes gangrenous and rotted and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have described in sections, and it does not improve: then one must have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterward bore or probe the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron comes into contact with the front and behind of it; and do this once or twice, afterward dress it with what we have said in treatments until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, that is good; but if not, then one must uncover the wound and remove the rotted bone, according to what you will find about it in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it's ineffective, then place the head of the patient in your lap. Afterward, heat the cautery whose shape will be described later so that you can put a cannula on the tooth; and quickly insert the heated cautery inside, keeping your hand there until the patient feels the warmth reaching the root of the tooth. Then lift your hand and repeat the process according to your desire. Afterward, have the patient rinse their mouth with salted water, and let it sit for an hour and spit it out forcefully.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was moving becomes fixed, and the softened gum becomes firm, and the corrupting moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from coldness, whether it's caused by cold or wind, and treatments with medicine are ineffective, then there is need for cautery in two ways: cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is done as follows: take virgin butter and put some on the tip of an iron or brass spoon. Then take cotton, wrap it around the end of a needle, dip it in the melted butter, and quickly place it on the aching tooth until it cools down. Repeat this often so that its effect reaches the root of the tooth. If you see that wetting the linen and cotton with cold butter does not help, then take a red-hot iron and hold it near the tooth until the heat reaches the top of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The combined fire cautery should be such that you take an iron or bronze rod, thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth. Afterwards, heat the cautery, of which the form will come later, and place it on the tooth, holding your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, for the pain will be relieved on that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, and then wipes off the excess heat; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	Make a cautery of whatever size you wish, according to your ability; and this is the shape of the cannula:
des scrophules	"scrophules"
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrophules are of hot and cold moistures, and not responsive to digestion through medicines, then use the cautery iron described below, which has two openings for smoke to escape. Place the heated cautery on the abscess once or twice until it reaches its base. If the abscess is small, adjust the cautery according to its size and leave it on for three days. Then apply moist cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed. Afterward, treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is healthy again.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cautery iron:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When excess moistures overcome the channels of the lungs, especially when this condition arises from a cold constitution, then the patient should first be treated with dissolvent medications. Afterward, apply the cautery at the root of the throat, taking care not to burn too close to the throat or the heart itself.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After this, make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and use the cautery called "clavile" whose shape we have described before; heal the place until it is sound.
de la toust	Of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	If the cough and lung disease are caused by cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or shortness of breath, and the disease is chronic, then apply two cauteries on the back at the kidneys; and another cautery between the breasts near the nipples. Use the cautery called 'clavile', as shown in the figure before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cautery prick with the entire cautery called "poins" whose shape is shown here in the disease of the ears; and let there be thirty pricks or as many around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After this, heal the place according to what is said before, and use the cautery with three points according to this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	"And because the cauteries are lighter, make three at once."
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	"of the dislocation of the jaw joint"
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	"When the jawbone is dislocated due to moisture and is put back into place but cannot remain there and keeps dislocating with even small movements, as we have experienced, then it becomes necessary for you to first reset the dislocation."
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	"Then have the patient lie on their back and side. Afterwards, lift the heart that is inside the titillite with the two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery that has two rows until it reaches this form:"
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	"And cauterize the heart until it penetrates to the side, and let the figure of the cautery reach four cauteries in total; and since this is done with the cautery that has three rows, the figure of the cauterization will be six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the thinness of a thread, which is the form of the cautery that has three rows:"
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	"And sometimes it is also joined onto this one nerve, so there are eight cauteries."
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	"Afterwards, apply a poultice made of bruised celandine with oil. Afterwards, let the patient rest and do not move their limbs for a long time until they are well comforted."
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavile cautery, or many pricks.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For once the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come into the stomach, causing it to stray from its nature, and phlegm multiplies in it, even with customary remedies there is no profit; then the patient must be made to lie on his back, stretch out his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Afterwards, perform three cauteries on the inside of the elbow near the armpit using an amount equal to two fingers, with each cautery having a clavicle shape. Perform two additional cauteries on either side such that the shape of the cauteries forms a triangle and maintains sufficient space between them so they do not join together when they suppurate; let the cauteries be deep enough to reach both parts of the heart, and their shape should follow this form precisely without adjustments:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that cauterizing with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form is necessary, and someone fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and pressing on the stomach at one point according to the amount you desire to heat; then cauterize all of the cautery which is called "the point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After performing the aforementioned treatment, ensure that it has healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When pain comes from coldness and moisture and excessive windiness in the liver, causing it to lose its natural complexion due to excesses, and although the patient has been treated with what we have mentioned in terms of divisions, they do not find relief. Therefore, the patient must lie on their back on a high bed; then perform three cauteries according to this shape, form, and quantity on the liver near the hypochondria where the ribs meet. Maintain the width of two fingers between each cautery; let them be long enough to reach halfway up the body without pressing too hard during the entire procedure; burn only half of the liver, ensuring that the patient is lying on their right side; if they cannot lie down, then have them lie on their back with legs extended and arms raised. This is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if it is your wish, cauterize these cauteries of the scalpel, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and ensure that you do not burn all the heart, for you would dry up the whole body; and let it not come close to the eye, for the heart is very subtle there, and you know this for sure.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the skin: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain that is not too strong; but if it is in the skin, they feel madness-inducing pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment fails the physicians, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back; and then press down firmly at the site where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, of which this is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the heart is burnt, and come close to the bladder, until all of the pores are completely opened; after that, treat according to the treatment of the ulcers until it is healed; and it is not necessary for anyone but those who have studied medicine for a long time and by whose hands these illnesses have often been cured to use this cautery.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly operate, but nonetheless it seems to me that letting [it] lie is better.
dou cautere de pleuresin	"Of the cautery for pleurisy"
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The Ancients said that for pleurisy, one should make cauteries with the roots of aristologist, and in this manner: Take a long root of aristologist, as large and thick as you can find, and dry it; moisten it in oil and heat it on fire. Make one cautery between the navel and the neck, two small ones a little lower, below the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly backwards; one cautery inside the breast, another one above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders; two more on both sides of the breast near the cautery between the shoulders. Do not press your hand hard, but hold it at a distance, like when smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient ones said that certain men used to apply a fire cautery like a razor, heat it, and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; and if there is pain, as we have said in the case of a liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this procedure, fear exists where the patient may die now, or a fistula may occur which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Here is the text "de la mice" in proper formatting:
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the eye that we have mentioned under divisions of treatments, and it does not improve at all, then there are three kinds of cautery that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one method is that you make three or four cauteries, lining up according to the length of the mouse, following the shape of the liver cautery we mentioned earlier; and do not rush your hand through the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on his back; and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two edges, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is located near the mouse, where the rib of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevations by which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Afterwards, place two burning irons until the heart is pierced on the other side, then draw out the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you wish, cauterize the entire wound with three irons.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment, when it has thrown off corruption for a long time, and this is more valuable than the other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	I have not found any mention of "ydropisie" in the text you provided. Is there a specific section or topic related to this that you would like me to summarize?
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not beneficial for someone with dropsy, except in the manner called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment is not effective, then you must make four cauteries around the neck, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the side, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and the cauteries should be close to the edge of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, leave the cautery open to discharge corruption for a long time, and do not leave off treating the patient afterwards; and healing will be hastened, and both intentions will come together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the key that we have shown before; and those for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been placed before.
de l’enfleure des piez	Here is how to treat swelling of the feet:
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in someone with dropsy and filled with yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deep; thus, it would break through like a citrine's skin, and let the cautery be according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards make two cauteries on each leg, two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cuticle; and let one cautery be long below the knee in front and the other behind in the middle of the leg; leave the cauteries on for a long time without dressing until they are discharged; afterwards cure the rest as we have said.
de la menoison	of the wound
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the stomach comes from coldness and moisture to such an extent that the retentive and digestive virtue which is in the stomach and intestines is weakened, and cannot be cured by any kind of cure; and you see the patient suffering greatly but with great strength, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said about the cautery of the stomach earlier, at the circular cautery; and four subtle cauteries around the mouth, each cautery being like a nail, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the point of the hip, and one cautery on each thigh, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or several, and are old and made up of large cold damp corrupt humors, and have been treated as we have said previously without any improvement, then apply cauteries: three on the spine of the back, one directly below the navel, one each at the sides of the anus, and if you believe that his stomach is cooled down, and the flesh does not cook, and the face appears swollen, then apply a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before, another on the liver, and another on the mouse, all with a wedge-shaped cautery; and let the cautery remain for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating it, cleanse the wound until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the softness called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut artery, then heat the cautery that seems like one razor, and then put it all ablaze on the cut artery; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the birth of the vein, where the blood flows. Do this once or twice, and if there is much artery, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards cure with ointments until they are clean. And if you cauterize with a large cautery on an artery, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	Of poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	If the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such an illness comes that it cannot be cured except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When someone has a fistula that is inflamed and filled with corrupt moisture and rotting matter, you should probe it with a very fine tentum, making sure you know the full depth of it.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the amount it has entered. Continue applying the cautery until the corrupt and decayed flesh is burned once, or twice, or three times depending on what is needed; but beware of burning the nerves that are within and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the intestine, beware of those areas and only perform cauterization in a fleshy spot where it is not easily perforated. Afterward, treat the area until it is healthy. If the area is sealed and the contents have been removed for a long time, then know that the area is completely healed. But if the contents have not been removed, know that the area is corrupted and the bone at the front is rotting; thus we will say about one of these in its proper place.
de la maladie des reins	Regarding kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	If cold pain comes in the kidneys and there is great windiness, and no woman's flow appears, then it is necessary that you perform cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with the clavicle cautery we mentioned earlier; and if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauteries in a row, which will be of greater help.
de la vessie	Regarding the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	If the bladder is weak and cold and moist so that the patient retains urine, then perform cautery on the front part of the bladder where the pubic hair starts, one on the right side and one on the left side, each cautery being as long as a hazelnut; and perform one cautery on the backside, or two if necessary, using the clavicle cautery according to the shape previously described.
de la marris	Regarding hemorrhoids (piles)
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not permit conception because of it, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, great pain is felt: then it is necessary that three cauteries be made around the pudendum, as we have said about the bladder cautery, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be clove-shaped, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the groin
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous humors descend to the groin and cause it to move from its place, and the sign is that the thigh appears longer than the other when measured together; and if the location of the separation is found empty, then you must cauterize the patient above the groin with one cautery shaped like a circle, and extend it before the place around the groin as it turns, so that the groin is inside the circle; and let the cautery be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present, make three large olive-shaped cauteries, and let the cautery be as deep as all the heart; and continue until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of groin pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the groin, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated for this with what we have said in the division but the treatment does not help, and the disease is ancient: then you must purge the patient of thick humors using foul-smelling pills or other good pills resembling them.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After this, perform cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two ways: namely, using burning medicines together, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery has many ways, one of which is as follows: cauterize the box of the beard with three triangular cauteries arranged in this shape, making them deep and large, leaving the width of two fingers between each cautery. Make the cauteries olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on top of the head of the beard, which makes four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	"And if you see it, cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have mentioned earlier in the case of dislocation of the hip joint; but do so in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip joint, and all the sharp edges of the heart are burned."
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica when the pain is felt in the beard and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient feels the pain, and one cautery above the ankle with three points on the left side; make the cauteries cutellar-shaped, and burn the thickness of a finger; if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near it, cauterize there with three or four points where it is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	"And if it is necessary to do more; and if the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with an elliptical or circular cautery, but be sure in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery on too long so as not to burn the nerves and large arteries, and so as not to cause greater harm and contraction to the patient."
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who performed cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a bout of diarrhea that caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, perform cautery on one and the other according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men say concerning cautery of the thigh, this is the manner: make it one such iron and let its head be as thick as a hazelnut or a little less, and let it have spaces between them and let them be spaced equally like grains of millet; and let the spaces be on both sides and also like nuts, and let there be one handle made of iron well-fashioned; this is its shape.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And let it be heated until it is entirely red and glistening with heat, then place it on the boil of the sick person's haunch, turned to face the sound side; cauterize once with one cautery iron, leave for three days, then make an embrocation of butter, allow the wound to remain open for a long time; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healed."
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	"Albucasis says that we use this cautery rarely due to its intense heat, and it is scarcely used. Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries when it can be endured, especially where it causes inflammation."
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of medicine are such that you make an instrument with spaces between them on which the edge of the door descends, and it should be made of bronze or iron on one side long, and at the top have two nuts, each separated by the thickness of a thumb; and they should be open above and overlap each other according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Place the box of hot ashes on the patient lying on his healthy side, then press your hand firmly onto the box. Afterward, throw between the two circles of the hot water that has been heated over a fire for one hour; allow this to continue for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and burning sensation.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For a burning sensation will occur, like that of fire. Once this sensation has passed, raise your hand along with the tool and remove the hot ashes; leave them in place for three days, then apply butter until the blackened skin is removed. Leave it for another three days to allow corruption to be drawn out; this is the final assistance after the treatment of ointments, provided the wound is clean.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make another tool like you did for the ashes, increasing its size accordingly; this is the method of hot water, as I have written in my treatise on medical corrections.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicklime and live stone, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and place them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And place over that pot another well-plombed pot, and add sweet water on top of the quicklime and live stone until there is about two handfuls of it above the powders when you grasp it firmly; leave it thus until the water drops out through a small hole bored into the bottom of the pot. Then take all that water and sprinkle it over hot coals and quicklime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very hot and is administered in many works of medicine and cauteries of other limbs. For it performs the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize well the hair, such as tannic acid, honey, and live stone with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure in which a man was healed from the pain in his hair and sciatic vein, highly praised, and says that no other treatment was performed, and he was immediately cured with just this one cure. He then bathed as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And crush some fresh and dry verdigris and grind it with a lump of fat. Apply this mixture to the hip joint, thigh, and leg where pain is felt, and cover it. Leave it on for three hours until the burning sensation subsides.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then have him enter a bath until his body is slightly warmed. Put him to bed, and the pain will all go away and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medications as a cautery unless after bloodletting.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it helps a lot. The cauteries should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and grease it with old oil. Apply it to the depression between the big toe of the foot and the one called the 'fascicle'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards take dry goat dung, burn it until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the linen. Leave it there until it is extinguished. Repeat this process again, continuing until you sense that the heat reaches the hip joint and the pain has ceased. This method of cautery is called 'goat cautery'.
de la dolor dou dos	"back pain"
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar matter spread coldly, cauteries are of no use in any of these cases except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has been emptied of fetid pills or others like them, one should place them on the back where the pain is located, three lines marked with ink, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see fit, make three cauteries or four at the middle clavicle bone according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often comes upon young children, and the sign of its onset is that they have a narrow waist when they stand up, and are pale. And you find in the dorsal spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and want to cure it, cauterize with the cautery called "celcle" according to this form:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery embraces each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it, then cauterize around the spine with a cautery pricking two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating it until it is healed according to what we have said, make sure that you do not apply a cautery in the spine where there is any weakness of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	de la dolor des jointes
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pains in the joints are due to moistures that are spread throughout each member of the body, and when pain comes on in the feet, which physicians properly call "podagra," and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: Make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to prick on the face of the foot, then apply cautery with all the cautery that one calls "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains reach down to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then apply cautery on each knee with three or four cauteries of each part, using the olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, do so, but do not hold your hand beyond that until the point of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains extend down to the knee and the back, then the administrator should apply the cautery that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make two lines of punctures around the wrist; and if there is still pain in the arms, make punctures on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains extend to the ribs or shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good care for the patient and give medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	But if you provide good care and purge phlegm, it will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	"On the rupture of the sinews"
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	"When operation comes in the anus, and the bowels descend to the thighs and this is newly begun, then it is necessary that when you see him cure himself, he does not eat that day, and let him use things that leave the belly so that the feces come down from his belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the bowels are relaxed, and stretch them out towards your two fingers, and press firmly below the operation on the bone of the thumb, and at each sign it should resemble half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery which has this form:"
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until he becomes pale and throws up worms.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bowels to their place; and the assistant should keep his hand on them so they do not move backwards; and open the patient's thighs well, and put one cushion under him and one servant on each thigh, and another on the chest where he holds the hands; then apply the cautery on the sign of the whole hand, from the thumb to the little finger until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bowel does not slip out while applying the cautery, so that you do not burn it and cause the patient's death or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with your cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be fine according to the measure of an egg, and for large people also large according to their measure; afterwards on the third day treat the place where the cautery was with butter until the scalding is removed; then cure it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound becomes well-healed; and it is necessary that his bandages be kept on a long time, so that his eyes do not bulge when he gets up to go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, let him bring a well-made bandage and wear it for another forty days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards himself from excessive drinking and eating, and from raising his voice too high; and when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter the treatment for cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Chapter 45: Of the operation for piles
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When fistulas occur in other bellies and are known to you, and you see that they do not grow any further, perform the cautery of the cautery of the rear according to its quantity, and burn the third part of the heart; afterwards treat it according to what we have said. And some of the ancients say that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery in this shape.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the starting point of the fistula and draw a line across its width above it, and another below it; then apply your hand throughout the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterization is lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Chapter 46: Of old pain in some limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, from falling or striking, and that pain lasts a long time, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called 'poins', and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness, weakness, strength, location, and twisting, and the nature of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed from the first burn, that's good; if not, repeat the cautery upon it, for such is the custom that it must change in the limb to which it is close, so you must make the burns until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Chapter 47: Of stitches
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The swelling is sometimes helped by cautery with great benefit, especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you cauterize the eye, beware if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not diminish or remain, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make cauteries on the head: one within the head at noon, and another towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape; and let your hand be so placed that the cautery reaches to the bone, and so that the skins come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape from them; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	"And if the stitches are spread out everywhere and it is manifestly lost, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery near the ear, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the hip and another beside it, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the calf, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes one makes a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver."
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more cauteries I perform, the greater help I give, and the more profit it brings. And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find them described in various iron techniques.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After applying a poultice of vetch flour with honey, perform other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices but is not healed, then apply cauteries to the limb according to its size. The cautery should be slightly penetrating towards the heart's span; afterwards, treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cauteries are applied to the hand, foot, and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb. And thus, if the swelling is removed; but nonetheless let no one meddle with this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of the ulcers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" becomes inflamed, and medical treatments do not work, then cauterize it with a cautery a little deep according to the thickness of the skin, until the blister is removed and its color changes; then treat it with a mixture of wheat flour and lentil flour with rose oil and plantain leaves, and pigeon blood and donkey blood, each one part; and mix everything together, and tie it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of a chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre appears at its beginning, and you see it stop, then cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	Moreover, wise men say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; but this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, as I have seen happen before. It is rather more appropriate that it be cauterized around with the cautery called 'circule', as we have said regarding many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of inflammation that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it lingers due to excessiveness or the weakness of the patient's body if they are elderly, causing them to have less blood, or because of time; and you see it hastening towards death: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she hastens to die
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you wish to pierce it entirely with the cautery, then heat the cautery of which here is the shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand on the midpoint of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it departing in this manner so that the course of decay is relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cautery with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease there is called "corrodens", which is nothing other than a consuming of limbs, for it consumes the limbs even as fire consumes dry logs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate a fire cautery together with fire, then heat the cauteries - small and large nails according to what is needed for the location where the disease is; afterwards cauterize it on all sides until you erase all corruption, and let nothing remain of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized places a poultice with oil until the burns of the fire are removed and all corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of poultices that generate flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; but if not, then resume the cautery on what remains of the corrupted place.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this wound has sometimes been cured with hot medicine instead of a fire cautery; but nevertheless the fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already mentioned the cure for hot medicine in its proper place. Take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Regarding swellings that come on one's feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Frequently, at the feet there appears a disease called "clos" according to our understanding, which is a large broken thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is performed in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	Namely, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is performed by heating an iron cautery like a vault tile until it is red hot and made of good iron to the size that it can reach around the nail on all sides with subtle edges. Then place it hot on the nail, turning your hand all around the nail until you reach the head of the nail. Leave it there for three days until it begins to ooze pus. Then make a poultice of wild mallow leaves crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on overnight, and the nail will fall out and be completely removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the place with anointing oil until it is clean.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are turned away from the body and happen often both in hands and feet, then you must bring cautery with hot water to it. And it is done like this: take a cane of brass or iron, or a feather of goose, and put on the nail and the horn, that is to say warts; and put the cane upon so that it encompasses all around, then put some hot water on it, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and can find a deep path for the hot water up to the root; and let the patient endure a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave him thus, and it will deroot itself altogether with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you root out all those that are on the body, then treat them with anointing oils that promote flesh growth.
li cure dou trembler	Here is how to treat trembling:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone shivers with coldness of nerves,
des pustules puans	of foul boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes appear on the body bathing-warm sores or foul pustules caused by large corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	Thus when they first appear it is necessary to apply a cautery to each head of the pustule: either a fine juniper wood cautery with its point heated in fire, or a long aristolochia root cautery, or else a lens-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they cauterize them at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and then they cannot grow further but the excess from which they come is eliminated, and they are healed. But it must be done after bloodletting.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound on the surface or at the incision of an aposteme or at the cautery of a member, and similar things. It is very painful to endure.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	"And indeed when this happens to anyone, then you should hasten to place your two index fingers on the vein wound, and press firmly until the blood beneath is pacified so that no more drips out; then put in the fire olive oil cauteries of various sizes until they are all red hot; then take one, either large or small according to the wound size and where the artery is severed, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold it there until the bleeding stops."
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	"And if it happens that the cautery is exhausted when you lift your finger from the vein, then take another quickly from those in the fire."
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	"And continue doing this until the bleeding stops. Make sure that you do not burn the nerve nearby and that no other harm comes to the patient. Know that when blood spurts from an artery, it cannot be easily stopped unless one of the four methods we have mentioned is used: cautery, extraction if it has not been treated, tight binding with thread, or medicines applied which have the power to stop bleeding. And let it be tied and pressed appropriately."
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	"And bringing about cessation of bleeding through tight binding with rags or applying hot things on top, or other similar methods, will profit little if at all."
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	"And if this happens to anyone and there is no doctor or medicine present, then one should place their index finger on the vein wound as we have said, and press firmly until the bleeding stops. Do not move your finger but moisten it with cold water frequently so that it becomes very cold until the blood congeals and ceases flowing; and afterwards do what is necessary with regard to cauteries and medicines."
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	"Here begins the second book of the remedies for wounds from cutting."
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	"We have told you in the first chapter all the diseases which require cautery with fire or hot medicine, and we have described their causes and remedies and forms of cauteries; and I have placed this chapter at the beginning so that one may find more easily what one wishes to know."
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	"Before I begin this chapter, dear friend, you should know that there is more danger and fear in this one concerning cauteries than in the first, and therefore it requires greater caution."
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	"For in the practice of this chapter there are many occasions for bleeding from opening veins, and incision on apostumes, and wounds, and extraction of splinters, and incision on stone, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many people die."
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake anything foolish.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many people come seeking treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	Among them are those who so cling to their illness that they die easily due to the frenzy they find in their disease and the severity of their condition; from these one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And among these are those who gain their sense of being cured, saying: 'Wait, I am healed'; yet the sick person is disheartened.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place greater care in your honor than in your desire for profit. Do not open foolishly but wisely regarding those from whom you can gain certain proof and praise; use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients to achieve their healing. This will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	"Dear friend, may our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen."
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	"Now I have arranged this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries which I have already divided from beginning to end, so that you may find more easily what you need."
dou chief plein d’aigue	Chapter 1: Head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	"Know that this disease often occurs in infants at birth, when the mother's passage is too narrow for the child's head; and sometimes it happens without any known cause."
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	"And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than infants, and all those whom I saw died quickly; and therefore it seems to me that I may leave the treatment of such conditions alone."
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	"And I saw one child whose head was full of water and grew larger every day until it could no longer support itself; and the swelling became so great that it died, and this swelling gathered under the bone on top of the syphac, between the heart and the bone; and if the swelling is between the heart and the bone, and the aposteme is small, then you should make an incision through the middle of the head with a blade wide enough for the swelling to escape; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the swelling can pass through. Here is the form of the spatulum:"
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	"If the swelling is larger and the aposteme is bigger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:"
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	"And if the swelling is under the bone and you see the signs that the angles of the head are open on each side, and water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, but nothing comes out: then you must make three incisions through the head according to this method:"
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after incision, remove all moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After applying compresses and powders, put wine and oil on it, leaving it so for five days. Then remove it, treat the wound with dressings and ointments, keep the head wrapped evenly, and give the patient dry food and drink until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	"And another method of incision is to observe where the greatest enlargement of the aposteme and the gathering of water appear, for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right side, and sometimes on the left."
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	"Therefore cut there where the aposteme appears and the gathering of water, and make the incision according to what you can manage; and be careful not to cut the artery; and if a vein flows with blood, so that the sick person dies from the loss of blood and evacuation of swelling."
de reume	Chapter 2: Rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	"When someone has a disease called 'catarrh' in the ears or feet, and the illness is long-standing and does not improve with medicinal treatment, then the final treatment should be cauteries combined with ligating the two arteries."
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, then, when you close the eyes of the patient, that he turn his head back; afterward, rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient stretch his neck with both hands on the cloth; then look where the vein goes and the places of one and the other are after the ears, and then press them down; then mark the places with ink, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula at two parts, so that the cut goes to the bone, and this should be done on the wide part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	"And if you see, push the spatula underneath the artery and cut it above it, cutting also two fingers wide across."
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, blood spurts out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the arteries do not appear by touch, then you must measure the quantity of space from three fingers' width, then mark with ink and cut to the bone; and the amount of blood that should be let out is six ounces, and perhaps a bit more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery. Then examine the wound: if it remains on the bone's point, cut off the scab so that no pus can come in, then squeeze the wound and bind it, applying ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	"Of dislocations"
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient dislocation and catarrh occur due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples, accompanied by madness and similar conditions, it is treated with various medical remedies but not all of them are effective. Therefore, we draw out the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient shaves the hair from their temples and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it beats well there, and is rarely covered except in some men who are very cold; and if it is covered, then the patient draws its neck with certain cloths, then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and raises the place with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatumile of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then grasp it with forceps and carefully cut away any surrounding tissue on each side; if the artery is thin, use the tip of your nail to tease it out, then cut off that part according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it is not cut, blood will not flow freely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	"And draw blood from the.vi. veins, until.iij.; and if the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with a double strand of strong silk thread to prevent decay reaching the wound before the stitching, and let blood flow; then cut away the excess flesh between the two ties at that very moment, and then, if you wish, cauterize with the surgical cautery until the bone is reached; and this is the main procedure if the patient has no fever and is of warm complexion."
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Furthermore, cauterization aids in finishing off moistures (i.e., infections): therefore it is more helpful with moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	When extracting arteries, one should fill the space with old cotton and place well-made bandages on top; once they are untied, cure it with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with bandages, until it is healed. If blood flows from the artery while working on it, hasten to cauterize with a hot iron or pour vitriol into your hand and place it over the wound to stop the bleeding; if you don't have this available, rub the wound with your thumb until the blood congeals, then rinse it with cold water until the bleeding stops, and bind it as necessary. The best and easiest method for extracting an artery is to cauterize its channel with a two-pronged cautery iron, but make sure the prongs are well-spaced to retain heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the prongs are too thin, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be one finger's width of space between the two blades, and then once you have marked the two spots with the hot iron, place it on them until it reaches the bone, and cut the channel in two places; and let the two wounds be some distance apart because this cautery does not join them entirely together; and that is the shape of the cautery.
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears from the eyes flow down the channels that are above the forehead of the head, and it does not help to treat them with medicine, and you see the sick person's face becoming reddened, and feel on their forehead trembling like shivers; and if the eyelashes are thin and moist so that the hairs of the paper-like tissues have fallen off, and the papers themselves are heated and burned by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called this remedy "cure contuse" by the ancients. You should do this for the patient who has this illness: First make them grow hair on their forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead equally spaced according to its length; one of the incisions should be as long as two fingers midway down the forehead and continuing downward to the nose, and the other two should be placed on either side of the forehead above the eyebrows, but be careful not to cut the arteries that are located on either side above the eyebrows. Keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and each wound should be the width of three fingers when joined together. Have a piece of sponge and many cloths ready to wipe up the blood, then insert the spatumile instrument in this manner:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Make the incision that is directly above the temple down to the second incision; then scrape away all the skin that is between the two incisions as far back as it reaches on the bone, and then make another incision from the middle one to the other second one, and finally extract this scalpel.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then insert into the first incision the instrument called "cultellaria," which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, not sharp; this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp costa blade towards the flesh of the heart, and the soft costa blade towards the bone, and press until it reaches the mid-line furrow.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels descending from the neck to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to those that open into the heart, and then do likewise in the middle furrow up to the other end; and then draw out blood evenly, and express the area for the blood taken; then place a wick of old cotton in each furrow, and lay wet compresses in wine, oil, and balm on top, ensuring that no boils come into being; and on the third day untie the bandages, and bring great plenty of sage tea, then treat with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments to heal wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	glaucoma
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When catarrh occurs frequently, and you see the eyes thin and small, and vision weakened, and the paper-like tissues burned; and the hairs fall out, and there is deep pain in the head, and the sick person sneezes; then know from these symptoms that these materials and this catarrh come only from many veins, and the remedy for it is as follows:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to raise their forehead, then make a great incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one across its width.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Start from the fissure of the left temple to the right temple and let the incision reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that move during chewing; and when the bone is exposed, then absorb all the blood with a sponge, and then open between the two lips of the fissure and put old cotton and linen bandages; then tie on it cloths moistened in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses. When it has been removed, then you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then heal with drying agents.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster with them; apply it to these wounds to promote scar tissue formation throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Here is the section on "The Stopping of the Ears" from the medieval French medical treatise "La Grande Chirurgie":
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into the ears is one of these four things:
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When something hard like a stone or other thing falls into the ear and does not fit properly or grow in the ear, place the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, distill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil there, then bring about extraction; and when the time is right, make him sneeze with condimentum, and plug his nostrils when sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and stretch the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Very often fever occurs with this treatment; and if it does not occur, one should perform an extraction using fine forceps, of which there is the form here:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it does not come out with the forceps, it is good to proceed with extraction using fine tweezers with a small opening. If that still does not work, make a hollow reed and insert its tip into the ear hole, then seal around it with soft wax so that wind cannot enter along with the reed; then heat it strongly, as often heat comes in this manner as we have described; if it does not produce heat this way, take birdlime, such as that used by birds, and put some on an instrument sharp for this purpose, wrap cotton around it, then press the birdlime against the stone or whatever it may be and heat it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Even if it doesn't come from all these things that we have said, then quickly split the ear before an abscess becomes warm and causes spasm; and the manner of splitting is that you first make the patient lie on their back, and draw out blood according to their strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear at the place where it hangs down; and let the cut be like a moon shape until you reach the bone, then break it according to your power, and quickly suck out the marrow."
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	"And if it's a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer one thin, subtle spatula according to this form:"
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that boil.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this if you think the boil is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made several incisions. Then extract it with fine forceps and apply suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is clean.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, in water that falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to first sneeze forcefully and fill the ear with thick cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it does not come out through the boil, then so be it.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, then take many needles according to the length of your thin and light fingers, heat them slightly in fire. Let the patient place one or two needles into the hole of their ear, and press with another needle from the other side, pushing one needle out through the other; continue doing this until all the water has come out, then take a reed and put one end into the ear while heating the other end with fire until it is burnt. Then repeat with more reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said in the case of stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	"In the extraction of a beast, if it is small bodied, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in division; but if it is large bodied that you can feel it, then administer extraction with forceps; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear."
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	"In the extraction of earthworms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in division and in treating distillations, and if the treatment does not help, then you must look at the ear towards the sun: if there are any worms visible, then extract them with fine forceps, and if none are visible, then take the tube that has this form:"
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And place the finest tip of the instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then suck strongly at the entire wound; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey coming out, then stuff around the wound with cotton as I have said in the case of stones; and if they still do not come out readily as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective for killing worms, which you will find treated in books on distillations; and distill your oils and medicines onto this instrument through which you shall insert them into the ear, of which here is the shape as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	"And let it be of silver or bronze, narrow underneath with one small hole, and above open for distillation; and for pressing inside the distillation there is one well-made instrument of brass for this purpose, and if you wish take one razor and wrap cotton thickly around its point; then throw your oil or juice and what you wish of medicines into the tube, and place the tube in the ear; then insert the razor with all the cotton inside, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled well out of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillation be a little warmed by the fire beforehand before distilling it into the ear; and make sure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be as good."
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Here is the section on "The Stopping of the Ears" from the medieval French medical treatise "La Grande Chirurgie":
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in its ears; and the same thing happens to adults due to injury of the ear, or flesh grown inside it, and some such blockages occur deep within the ear so that one cannot see them; and sometimes there is one pore missing from the hole, which is clearly visible.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, those that occur deep within the ear, so that one cannot see them, are difficult to treat in many situations, and in these cases it is necessary to put the patient's ear in the sun and look inside: if you see the obstruction appearing, then perform the procedure described below:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	"And let it be sharp and cutting both before and behind, entirely full, so that it does not wound the ear; if the protuberance is of flesh born in the body of the ear, hold it with fine forceps, and cut lightly, until all that flesh is removed."
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operations are deeply embedded in the ear, then take a fine sharp razor and heat it lightly over the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the operation where the patient feels pain in hearing, pierce lightly and carefully, ensuring not to injure the nerves of the ear; then place a bandage according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Continue doing this for a few days until the wound is healed. Then take a plug and moisten it with rose water, powdered vitriol, and place it in the ear. If you see that the ear is swollen, you must remove the plug and insert another one moistened with cerote made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling has gone down; then cure it until it is healthy."
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	"And if there is discharge of blood, dip a sponge in cold water and wring it out, then place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the discharge of blood, which can be found in treatises on distillations."
de la char des papieres	"It seems like you're trying to translate "de la chair des papelards" which means "of the flesh of paper". However, it doesn't make sense in this context. Do you mean something else?"
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	"This is the remedy for those boils that come on moist skin and then dry up: you must stretch them with tweezers and pincers, and cut them open with a spathaula from their roots; then sprinkle powdered vitriol on the wound."
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	"And if they burst open and bleed, cauterize them with a fine lenticular cautery, and then apply the cautery again after the incision. This is often repeated until nothing remains of their roots; and once they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return."
de la gresle	"Here is the remedy for hailstones:
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times there come on the papers of the eyes things that appear like hail in their shape and hardness, and therefore this disease is called 'hail', and it is a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below; its treatment is thus: guard yourself if the hail moves from one side to another, and this is an easy thing to know; then make the opening wide, then scrape each part lightly, then grasp it with pincers, and cut it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	But if you cannot cut it without piercing the paper a little, then it does not harm the patient; and if the crack is large, stitch it together and heal it until it is sound; and if it is small, do not use force, for the medicine will restore it soon and fill it with flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	"And if the hail is descending into the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and grasp the hail with pincers, and remove it and press on both sides; and if the paper is separated by the incision, do not worry; and when the hail has been removed, rinse the ear with saltwater, and treat the wound until the patient is healed."
de la graisse des eulz	"Regarding eye fat:"
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is inside the threads of the papers above, and this happens more in children than in adults, and it harms their eyes greatly, and they have cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; and therefore they lie on their faces all the time, and sleep thus, and their papers below their eyebrows are moist with the swelling and appearance that has been covered by the exinach that opens into the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press it with your two hands and feel it give way.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	"And the manner of treating it is as follows: the patient puts their head in your hand; then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains eye fat on each side, then place it on them; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the eye fat gathers within the circle; then make a cut down the middle of the moistness with a sharp scalpel, making a wound no larger than the one made in the vein of wine; and cut deep into the skin until you reach the eye fat; and in various positions, eye fat comes out of the wound, resembling a piece of white fat."
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	"Therefore, extract it all with one piece of soft cloth between your fingers and turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and be careful not to stick in the wound, so that you do not harm all the skin up to the eye, lest you injure it."
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	"And if the eye fat does not appear at the beginning of the wound, then slightly widen the wound lightly until it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the wound, and squeeze out the bandages."
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are such men who grind salt and place it on top to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal it until it is healthy again.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes to the place, then treat it with poultices that are soothing until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	"Regarding eyebrow hair:"
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	"If eyebrow hairs are born joined together abnormally and entangled, they cause harm to the eyes, and bring about conditions such as constant tearing and softening of the eyebrows and whitening, to the extent that it causes damage to the eyes; and there are four ways to treat it: either by cautery with fire together, or by hot medicine according to what is appropriate before or after cautery, and it can be done either by incision and stitching, or by tweezers, depending on what I will say."
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	"It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the eyebrow away from the eye with your left hand; if it turns well, good. If not, insert a needle with one thread onto it; and let it be near the edge of the eyebrow where the hairs are attached to those hairs, and draw one thread up over the entire eyebrow, and turn it towards the razor; then make an incision downwards under the eyebrow, under the joined hairs, all along the eyelid from the large tear gland to the small one; then extract one thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth underneath the eyebrow, then press on the eyebrow with your finger, like the lid of a mirror, and in any case the figure must be according to the quantity that you see raise the eyebrow which is separated from them."
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is need to cut off a large quantity of the paper according to how it has been softened; then make two lines along the entire length that you have marked, and begin from the larger line up to the smaller one; and let one of the cuts be close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then place the needle into one of the two angles of the heart, then scrape off all the skin; then join the two lips with a stitch of thread made of fine wool, and absorb the blood, and dry any excess threads on the two eyebrows with any sticky substance you have, if you can see this being done; and if not, don't worry about it, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitching using drying and constricting substances, because the paper will revive at the joining of the wound and its closure, but stitching is harmful (as the ancients said), and this is work done without fear; and there is another method: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure like the leaves of myrtle, as we have described, with three needles spread out according to the shape that is shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	"Then cut what is above the small forceps evenly according to the shape shown here:"
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	If you cannot hold the forceps and the thing is not even, take a needle with thread, insert it into the figure; place another thread beside the large artery and the second thread beside the small one, and gather them evenly between your fingers. Then raise your hand evenly, and raise all the skin on which you have signet-ed, as we have described, then close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is clean; And if an abscess forms at your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar softening ointments. And sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper turns: you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one or the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	"The cure for the canthus (corner of the eye) is as follows: and it is that you fold the paper and make an incision inside according to what I have said, and then make two threads by art, and two fine ties as long as the paper and the width of the spatula; and cut at the two ends of the two parts where you hold the threads; then join one and the other subtly on top of the oil paper, and tightly tie the two canthi from the two parts; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and shrivel and shrink until it becomes smooth."
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, cut through the forceps, then care for it until it is clean; And when the wound is healed and the paper is removed, the hairs will no longer prickle. And this is the form of the two canines that you should make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	"The operation is as follows: take a fine needle and thread it with one soft and fine silk thread; then tie the ends together subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm in length; then prepare another fine silk thread briefly, and tie its ends to the first thread; then the patient should put their head on your shoulder, and they should stand near the sun so that the operation is illuminated, for it is a subtle and delicate operation; then take the needle all along the hairline close to the skin, and pierce it into the paper hastily until you draw it up above the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the hairline, and put it back into the hairline if there are one or two or three or more hairs; then withdraw your hand so that all the hairs come out of the hairline onto the paper with the natural hair."
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	"And if the hairline is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the hairline down all along the thread that you have prepared, until the hairline comes out of the hole above and you can see it with the naked eye; then pull the hairline and the thread together, and close the eye and let it heal for two or three days, until the hair returns to its place and the skin grows over it; and if the hairs are sparse, accompany one long natural eyebrow hair, and lift it up with that one which you leave, so that it is elongated and then lifted up."
de la porriture de l’oil	de la porriture de l’oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called "aleacrati" or decay occurs in the eye, there are two kinds of it: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting or cauterizing, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of treating it is that you should break open this scab and separate the lips of it, and put in linseed wadding, and let it until it heals; and you must not use things that dry out and constrict in its treatment.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but there are things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or album water and linseed should be cooked, and ointments of diachylon melted in some oil, and one should wrap a wadding with it for the treatment of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you should be careful that it does not heal according to its former shape; and these operations that we have mentioned are only remedies for this illness, so that it does not return in its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is called "axacrati" under the eye is natural but accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things; and the way of the operation in it is that you take a needle, on which there is double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid to the right, so that the threads come out through two holes in the flesh; then stretch the flesh above the entire needle, and cut with one wide spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure on the paper returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, then take one razor and place it in the cut, and turn the paper over, and make two cuts along the edges inside the paper; and let the holes of the two cuts be at both angles of the incision you have cut, and make one angle such that when they are joined together, the figure is like the figure of a letter called "I Greek"; then remove that flesh according to its quantity which was beneath the paper, from what supports the paper, then join the two separated parts with thread made of wool; then treat it as we have said regarding softening medicines and dressings, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or stitches or cauterization, then you must make a full slit under the hair of the paper, and according to what is said above; then open between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters prepare ingenious devices with all their power so that they make the figure return to its natural shape; and the sick person himself, according to what he needs of operations and instruments, in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	de l’acuité de l’oil et du mouvement des esperitz
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this fusion occurs in many men in such a manner that the paper on top is stuck with the white of the eye, and it cannot move nor perform its natural duties, then you must insert the point of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it up; and stretch them with pincers until you reach that which is attached to the subtile spatula, which should not be too dull nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot bear the spatula being too dull nor cutting the eye; and let your incision be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and all of this assembly is healed, and sometimes in the eye they make salt water, and lift it with fresh water, and collyrium. Then put a linen cloth between the paper and the eye, and put on the eye wool moistened with egg albumen. And after the third day use collyrium and healing substances until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the corner of the eye is in two ways: it is nerve-like and similar to one hard skin, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles moist white congealed blood. When you touch it with iron and try to grasp it with pincers, you cannot do so; both these appearances begin near the large tear duct, and gradually grow little by little until they cover the whole sight and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is as follows: The patient should put their head in your hand, then open their eyes. Lift the paper with your hand, then grasp the corner with small pincers and stretch it up. Then take a needle, and on it place one horse, cow, or ox hair, and a strong thread. Double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the corner, piercing it entirely with the needle, and tie the corner with a thread and stretch it upwards. Then scrape along the entire length of the hair the side of the corner that covers the pupil and the iris up to the head. Then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear duct using the subtle spatula and small forceps, leaving the natural flesh in the tear duct so that the incision does not interfere with the normal flow of tears. Sometimes the corner is stretched only with the needle and thread, as we have said before. Then scrape it gently with the soft spatula, which has this shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure that the spatula does not touch the delicate flesh and damage it, nor should the pupil be pierced. After the incision, sprinkle a little crushed selbroit into the eye, and apply collyrium made of lead ore, leaving it overnight. Then treat it with what is necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerve-filled,
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And carefully raise the nail above it, and if you see that it does not thin out nor the reason press thereupon, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red ochre ground together, and stop up the eye until the next day; then recommence the same work according to this very same procedure, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If anything opposes you in the eye, such as a hot sore, then apply milk and first cure the hot sore until it is healed, then recommence the operation just as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid harms the eye greatly, then suspend it with a needle and cut off part of it but not all of it so that tears do not come from there; then distill into the eye red collyrium made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows upon the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In the eyes of some men, sometimes there is born red flesh which covers the pupil and presses upon the papery skin and twists at the edge, resembling a pomegranate flower; and this is its operation: let the patient place his head in your hand, then open his eyes wide, and gather all that flesh with suitable tweezers, and hold it firm with strength; then cut away the first layer of flesh, and keep cutting all along to the very end with a razor, taking care not to wound the eye during this operation. And let the incision be made as we have said in the cutting of the nail and in small forceps for removing the boil, as shown later in this chapter; and when the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, then dress the eye with crushed rue or distill upon it red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton dampened with eggwhite over the eye so that a hot tumor may form thereupon; and if anything remains and hot blood overflows, and you suspect a hot tumor, then leave the eye alone and treat the tumor with things that allay a hot tumor. Then return to your operation until it is clean again, and do thus for each layer of flesh joined in the eye by this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless you should alleviate the cure of each weak eye by the natural way; and in case of an accident, operate with iron; and do not put your hand into any operation until you see that these members can withstand this operation.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Before veins become reddened, which cover over the eye, they weaken vision and diminish its power daily.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, it is necessary that you first examine the eye where the vein appears prominent; if there's no other visible disease besides the prominence; then proceed thus: tell the patient to tilt their head toward you, gently press these veins at the inner canthus according to your expertise, and use a double-ended needle of this shape
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two hooks at intervals of one finger's breadth on the same body according to this shape:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then carefully tie those veins and squeeze out the blood hour by hour until you see the veins move away from the eye; and ensure that you do not cut the eye with the points of the spatumiles, and perform this task at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your task so that you only touch those veins; and when you have done this, then distill green and red collyrium into the eye to corrupt what remains of the seed.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to collect all of this in that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye made from soothing substances for eye pain, and leave it on for several days until the pain is eased and an aposteme is formed, then resume according to this method until it is healed; and this is the form of the treatment.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The surgeon calls a fistula "arissati": when you heal it with cautery and medicine that is very hot according to what I have said before, but it is not healed, then there is a device in it such that you must cut on the aposteme where it should die, and remove all of the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then take all of the instruments that are needed for this task; and they are called "aspre chief", and should be made of red iron with one sharp point like a file as it is in its present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the sharp point of the instrument on the bone that is corrupted, then twist it between your fingers and press your hand gently until you know that all of the corruption has been removed; and do this several times, then restore the wound with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the place is hard and no pus issues, and the body of the bow is hard, and it remains thus for forty days without worsening or becoming an abscess; nor does any bad accident occur, know that it is healthy. But if not, then there's only one option left: to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nostril according to this shape. And this is how you do it: uncover the bone a second time with iron, and use hot medicines. When uncovered, take this awl according to this shape; let the iron head have three angles, and thin the shaft right up to the tip as shown here
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the ear, and move your hand away from the eye. Then turn the drill until it pierces the bone and the patient feels by this that the vein is hit if he holds his hand over his nose. And then restore the location with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the location, then the matter goes to the nose; so it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue from the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye opens fully in all directions, and there is no obstruction to the nose nor diminution, then you must bandage the patient; then wash it, then place cupping glasses or leeches without wounding to suck; then put on the eye a plaster made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and cover it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, and double each one into four, and then place them on top of each other according to how much the eye needs; then strain it with a firm bandage, and begin again with the cupping glasses to suck without wounding; then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the plaster melts, you must remove it frequently; then remove the plaster after the day and night, and if you see that the eye is healing, that's good; if not, begin again with the emplastrum and bandages and plaster and cupping glasses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the prolapse of the rectum
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the prolapse of the rectum comes and opens, and paper comes out like grains of resin, and it is horrible to see; therefore if you see it happen, the operation is as follows: take a needle and insert it into the root of the part below until it reaches the part above, then take another needle with one double thread from the part of the anus; and make it pierce through, and leave the first needle according to its position; then tie the loop of the double thread around one part of the rectum and strain it well, then remove the needle and place on the wound linen moistened in egg albumen; and let it remain until the prolapse comes with the rectum, then treat the wound with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the rectum on each side with a band of cloth until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye has great protrusion, then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes from far behind the eye, and draw out the moist albumen and allow the eye to descend, and enter immediately; then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eyebrow
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but a vein that collects in the eye, resembling descending water, yet it is not water. And the manner of its appearance at work is as follows: make the patient sit on an appropriate and straight seat, then take their head between your two hands, and move it until you see the vein rise up before your eyes; then pierce it, and let it not descend nor be disturbed by light, and let the patient see things as they used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the vein is not appropriate as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the patient is seated between your hands, then take the delicate spatula and cut through the cornea's connective tissue with the skin along its outer edge until the boil emerges; once it has emerged, distill into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and mixed with honey, then treat it further until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have now the likenesses of waters in their divisions, and what should be used for piercing; work accordingly to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You must have the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and have them hold their healthy eye tightly shut; then place the eye paper in your left hand if the affected eye is on the left, or in your right hand if it's on the right. Then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the eye is left, or in your left hand if it's right. Place the tip of the almagda near the cornea along the thickness of a reed at the inner corner of the eye towards the nose, then gently push the almagda and twist your hand until you feel it pierce through to the empty space behind the cornea; ensure that the length of the almagda's path is equal to the length from the beginning of the pupil to the end of the blackness. Then you will see the bone through the clear cornea, and then place the instrument up to where the water is, then express it through one channel after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water flows downwards, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a brief rest, if the water rises through the second passage, insert the wick with the instrument. When it is firmly in place and no longer rises, gently remove the almagda by turning your hand little by little; then apply a drop of gemstone water to the eye, and lift the eyelid from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place over the eye a wad of wool moistened in rose oil and egg yolk, and bind it with the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those who are from our time, we place common bruised basil mixed with egg yolks on top.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter into the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then you should take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then pierce only the conjunctiva, not too deep but carefully, and insert the almagda as we have said. After completing this procedure, prepare for the patient a comfortable dark room where he should sleep on his back for three days without moving, taking light food and keeping his head still. Bind him according to his condition until the third day, then untie him in the same dark room and test his sight with various objects. If he sees them well, then rebind him for seven more days. Do not perform this procedure during or immediately after the operation, but wait a while so that the water does not rise too quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When an abscess is about to form, you should open the eye in front of it on the seventh day, and use a plaster that draws out the abscess; and once it has been drawn out, close the eye and place a lint bandage over it for several days, ensuring that it remains in a dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then gradually leave the house little by little, and return to your usual habits; and know that no disciples should intervene in this matter.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	"And one came to us who was from Jerusalem, who told us that in their land they use almagda to pierce through, into which water is sucked, but nonetheless I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a novel thing."
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	"And these are the likenesses of the shapes of almagda, so that those who do not know them may see them; and let them be made of pure silver:"
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	"And let their fronts be of this same subtlety, and the back have three sharp corners."
de la char sor le neis	To remove flesh from the nostril
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes various kinds of worms are born or found joined together, among which some resemble scorpions with many legs; and there are also such worms that have flesh of a dark color, and others that have flesh of fair color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Therefore, in the case of those worms that are soft and not dark-colored, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun, open their nostrils, sprinkle honey onto the worms, and chase them out; then carefully pluck off as many as you can hold with tweezers using a fine, sharp-pointed probe on one side until you know that all of the worms have been removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any thing that cannot be scraped off, open it with one of the light, subtle instruments until nothing remains; and if it swells up or becomes inflamed, then treat it as necessary. And if they are malignant ulcers, rush to cauterize them so that the blood is stanched and all the flesh is removed, then pour on them immediately oil and wine or vinegar
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nostril opens and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is healthy; but if moisture does not reach as it should, know that there is bone marrow in the bone above, which prevents the tool from cutting: therefore you must insert a thread of moderately thick linen, dampened with hot water, into the nostril, leaving a space of one finger or less between each fold. Let the patient place the head on the thread firmly and pull it through while smelling strongly until it reaches the mouth. Many children do this at school, and it is easy for those who wish to perform it. Then hold one end of the thread that comes out of the nostril with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and pull them gently towards you in turn, as we have done.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the nostril has expelled all the corrupt flesh, then pull out the thread, squeeze out the blood, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment, then replace it in the nostril as before. Do this for three days or more, until the ointment has completely destroyed any remaining flesh. Then place a wick of wool moistened with a little olive oil in the nostril for several days until it is clean, and if necessary use drying medicines. This is the form of the instrument used to purge the head, through which oils and nostril medicines are distilled.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it is made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp like a tube with the conduit also; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full in order to purge the head; and let it have many holes at the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	To remove flesh from the nostril
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times there appears on the nostril a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large enough to be clearly seen; therefore you must cut it at its beginning, and remove all of its root, then apply cauterization or burning medicine to it. But if it is delayed until it is large, beware if it is hard, of dark color, and poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted aposteme. For when you cut it, great mischief comes upon the patient. And if the aposteme is soft to the touch, not dark colored, and you see that it can be completely cut, then empty out the nostril without fear, and cure it afterwards with drying and restricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nostril is cut and cauterized
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes upon one of these cartilages, it profits little, except perhaps in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, first examine if the wound is fresh throughout its blood; and then join the two lips with a stitch, and treat it until it is clean. But if the lips are already separated on both sides, you must scrape all the parts of their skin until they are sound, then join the two lips with a stitch, bind them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and crushed incense upon them; and place over the powders a piece of strong plaster or other adhesive plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is clean.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of stitching is as follows: you can join the wound together using needles, as we have said in the case of abdominal suturing; or with thread, as I have already explained to you.
des apostemes des levres	Of the apostemes on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many men have hard apostemes on their lips resembling grains of wheat, some small and others large. Therefore you must turn the lips back and cut along each one with a knife, then grasp it with forceps and cut it in every part; afterwards fill the space after the incision with ground vitriol until the blood is stanched; then leave it alone, and cure it afterwards with drying things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	Of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times there appears on the gums attached flesh, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore you must hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, then let the bow or blood flow. Then place ground vitriol or other restricting and drying powders upon the wound; and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, then cut it again and cauterize it: for it will not return afterwards; these are the forms of the instruments used to cut it.
des sordens	Of sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes the teeth in the head are joined together, inside the mouth between the gums, with rough and sharp scabs; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish-green and wormy, so that corruption reaches the gum and the teeth smell bad. Therefore you must make the patient sit between your hands, their chin in your lap, and scrape the teeth or scabs until there is nothing left of them. And do likewise with blackness and greenness and yellowness and other stains until they are cleaned; and if what was there at first is removed, it is good; but if not, then recommence on the second day and the third until you have everything scraped; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments for scraping according to what the task shows, because those used for scraping teeth from the front are different from those used for scraping between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you are treating a toothache, you must delay extracting it as long as possible because this should never be done except in the highest degree of necessity.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is constrained due to toothache, you must be certain about the aching tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain leaves the patient and they believe it is in the good tooth, and have that tooth pulled; yet still the pain does not depart, for we have seen this many times. And when you are certain about the aching tooth, then scrape around the tooth with a sharp spoon to ward off the gum on all sides. Then move it with your fingers or delicate forceps bit by bit until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp it with the forceps; and hold the patient's head between your knees, and yours so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these tools and gently insert it on each side, and use the lever tool as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is cracked or broken, then you must fill the holes with wadding where the piercing occurred; and gently grasp it with forceps so that it does not break while extracting; and there must be careful bleeding around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take care not to break it, and if a piece remains, it will cause the patient even greater pain due to the wickedness of the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware not to act like the ignorant surgeons who through haste and recklessness sometimes break the jawbone and do not follow what we have described; but often bring upon people great illness due to pieces left in the roots or the broken jawbone, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the area with wine, hot water, and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, sprinkle the area with powdered vitriol; and if that does not suffice, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the tools with which one should extract teeth first are those with long points and thick handles so that they do not double over when pulling the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of large members so they do not bend during traction, and made of well-smithied iron, and toothed for holding movement.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	If the root remains at the breast, then you must put moistened cotton smeared with butter for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the joint is softened, then put inside the tongs called "algefri," with which the head seems like a parrot's beak; and they should be shaped within like a file.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these pliers, you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root and place the tool called "althali", namely, the crowbar; this is its shape
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break. If the root jumps out with this, that is good; if not, help yourself with all the tools, of which their shapes come hereafter
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this tool that has two handles, this is its shape
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools that are in front of the root of the teeth, and this tool that resembles large pliers; this is its shape
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let these tools be strong so that they cannot break. Know that there are many dental tools and also others not counted. And the wise and subtle master finds his own tool according to what his works and the illness dictate for him, because there are such illnesses where ancient masters did not teach any tool due to their diversity of today. And if he breaks neither cartilage nor other bones, then he seeks among the tools that are necessary, which I have told you about, and helps himself with gestures; this is its shape
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-holding to hold the bone so that it does not slip away but can grasp and remove it. Then restore the place with suitable medicines for that location. And if there is decay in the bone and it is small, then remove it with all these tools
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear not according to their natural course and are misshapen in form, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is close behind the other tooth and not in its proper place, so that one cannot be placed or polished: then rasp it. And if it is next to the tooth, take this tool whose shape is like a small beak and made of iron with a sharp edge at the top
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And strike the tooth gently with your hand every day to harden it and so that you do not move the others. And if it is visible so that it can be polished, then use this kind of file whose shape is like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file used to make needles. And gently file the tooth little by little every day so that it does not move too much and then level it at the end with any plane or scraper. And if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then file down its sharpness until it is smooth so that it does not hurt the tongue nor interfere with speech
quant li dent lochent	When teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth is loosened, either by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot chew what they eat without it hurting, and you have treated them with constricting medicines but to no avail, then you must restrain it with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never does. The thread should be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth. If you see that the teeth are straight, take the thread and double-fold it between two healthy teeth first, then place the head between the loose teeth if there is one or more, until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side. Then begin covering again up to where you started, and hold your hand steadily and carefully so that it does not move. Your tying should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grasp the head of the thread with a pair of pliers, and join them together, and place them between the sound teeth, so that it does not burn the tongue; then keep it thus tightly together as long as possible, and if it loosens, or the threads fray, tighten it with another thread. Thus it will remain and serve throughout its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two sound teeth and the two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it is put back in its place little by little, as we have said. And only let those who are wise and careful handle it, and sometimes the shape of a cow's bone tooth is made and placed where the defect is, and it is secured with wire as we have described, and it remains there for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut the frenulum of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this binding occurs beneath the tongue naturally at birth; or due to an accidental wound. The procedure is as follows: open the patient's mouth and hold their head steady with your hand while lifting the tongue. Then grasp the thick nerve ligament with forceps until the tongue is released from its attachment. If there is scarring or stiffness, which can occur from a wound, use an awl to cut through it. Be careful not to cut too deeply to avoid damaging the artery below. Once done, rinse with rose water and marjoram, or cool water, then place a linen bandage beneath the tongue each night so that the tissues do not stick together.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood starts to flow, then place crushed vitriol on the spot; and if the blood continues to flow, cauterize it with a slow-acting cautery iron, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it has a pale or black or hard appearance and the person does not feel it, do not touch it at all, because it is a chancre. And if it appears to be leaning towards a blenorrhoea, with moisture present, then scrape it off with an onion and make a subtle incision with a fine spatula and deliver it on both sides. If bleeding occurs from your operation, sprinkle powdered vitriol over it until it stops, then return to your operation and remove all the furuncle. Then rinse the area with sage and celandine and treat it with other remedies until it is completely healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	On swellings of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If hard, small, and earth-colored boils appear in the throat, called 'godath,' which are properly called tonsils, if you treat them as we have described earlier but they do not heal, beware: do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	But if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron, also because of blood flow; but let it fester until it becomes ripe, then you can burst it, or it will break on its own. And if they are whitish and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cut, but first check if the boil is resting calmly and is peaceful.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then seat the patient before the sun, and his head in your hand, and he open his mouth and the servant take the sword between their hands, and press the tongue below with all the tool, of which this is the form; and it be of silver or refined brass like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	"If you press the tongue against this tool and see the swelling, take the needle and insert it into the tonsil, then push it in further than you can. Then pull out some of the cloth with it, and cut with the tool, which has the shape of a forceps. Be careful though, as their tips are curved inward and they are very sharp. They are made of iron or steel:"
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if you do not have this tool present, use tongs, which have this shape:"
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	"And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other. And when you have cut one of the tonsils, cut the other in the same manner. After the incision, the patient should gargle with warm water and sage, and if there is bleeding, he should gargle with water or cooked pomegranate rinds or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops. Then treat it until it is healed. And sometimes other swellings appear in the throat besides the two tonsils; cut these as you would the two tonsils."
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was near inside her throat, namely a small abscess; and it had almost closed up the entire throat, so that she could not exhale through the blocked passage, nor eat or drink, and would have died if left thus for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had risen so high that it had been pierced twice through the two openings near it.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then acted swiftly, and inserted a feather into one opening, then drew it out with great care, extracting much bile; then pierced the other opening near the abscess, opened her mouth and pressed down on her tongue; afterward inserted the feather into the abscess, cut off a portion of it, from which only a little blood issued forth; and thus was the throat passage opened for the woman, and she began to drink water then wine, and I kept cutting away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess continued to grow back, filling up the space that I had emptied out until it became very large; therefore I cauterized it with an iron instrument inside her throat: thus it remained without growing further; and I departed from those parts, and do not know what God did with her afterwards.
de l’uve	"of the eye"
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When tears descend to the eye, and it is dilated and long, it is called "perpendicular"; but if it is below thick and round, it is called "tear.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is curetted as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help at all, and you see that the hard abscess has softened, and it is thin, then you must cut it; but if it is round and gathered together and not long; and it is sanguine or of dark color or black, then you should avoid incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient thereby.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to its manner of blenching and length, make the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument mentioned earlier; then insert a needle into the eye and draw it underneath, and cut it with one or two instruments as mentioned in the incision of both mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut any more than the superfluity that exceeds the natural limit; for if you cut more, you harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of two kidneys, and treat until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears being cut, then you must use a device for cauterizing the sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cautery is hot and dry.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue on the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and fills it with hot water that is neither too thick nor too thin; and in placing this instrument gently, here is its shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Et ait ou chief une cheveure où om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d'une cuillier, et met l'estrument a tout la medicine sus l'uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu'ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l'uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d'une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l'envoloupe sus certain estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l'estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s'aerde sus l'uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l'essue entor l'uve, de couton embut en burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arrosez d'aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu'il soit sanez."
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	"This cure is more powerful than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and mugwort and similar herbs, and assemble them all together in one pot. And put a hot ember into it, and let it boil well; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot there should be one iron instrument made like this:"
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or brass, and one of the heads should be placed in the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the eye through the canal, until the eye is numbed. Afterward, repeat this often until the eye is dry, and ensure that you do not perform this procedure at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many things can happen there; and do not perform it further than the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a goose feather and place it within the head so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot for it is good together with healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	"Many times there is a bone stuck in the throat or spine of a fish, or some other thing. Therefore you should extract what you can see and press the tongue with the instrument towards the sun until you see it move. And what you cannot see but is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the thing will come out through vomiting. Or the patient may swallow a piece of sponge or a piece of flannel or a piece of lettuce root or a small piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it. And when it comes to the right place, it will stick, and then you can pull it out again. And if it does not come out from what we have said, then take one instrument made of lead in this shape:"
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	"And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they can enter the throat more easily, and have the head raised high. And take care not to touch the epiglottis lest it close completely, nor push the bone inside. And it is better for the patient himself to insert the instrument in order to know where the thing is stuck; then he should draw it out gently with the instrument until it comes out."
de la sansue de la gorge	"de la sansue de la gorge"
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes bloodletting is performed without the use of cautery, as I have mentioned in my division, through the use of medications. And if this does not prove beneficial, then observe the throat of the patient towards the sun, and afterwards press the tongue with the instrument that I have described.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see bloodletting, then treat it with a small incision using tweezers or fine forceps.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not prove beneficial, take a goose feather and place it in the throat of the patient, then place the tip of the feather into hot iron, and perform this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient sweats throughout the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full hands of cold water and open the mouth, pour it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand frequently; and as soon as the blood feels the water, let it fall.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye. Do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is thus: take one pot which has live coals within, and let the pot be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, through which the head of the instrument will be placed. Then throw your fumigation into it, and the patient puts the head of the tube into their mouth, closing the mouth so that no smoke escapes but reaches only to the nose; and the stone shall now fall, and if it does not fall then begin the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and drink no water. And thus it will be necessary for the stone to pass through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats blood is like this: when it can be seen, resembling curved tweezers for entering into the throat; and it resembles a crow's beak, and has sharpness like a file, so that what it takes, it cannot let go. And here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	Chapter on Abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what memory brings here from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision; and there are two ways that one is in its same form, and those that it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for those places where they are inside the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those in the fundament, and those in fatty tissue are different from those that come to joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the bowels have died according to their fullness; and there are some that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and they do not die according to their fullness, like those that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and they are left until they are quite ripe around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is near the main member, and if you delay its perforation until it dies, it will harm the main member; where it is near the fundament, pierce it before it dies; and it is not necessary to pierce a hard abscess without proper digestion accomplished, except for that which is near the fundament lest it penetrate deeply and form a fistula; nor can it be healed in a long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	"And you must know the hour for piercing a boil that has ripened completely, and this is when the pain subsides, and the fever departs, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the bursting and hardening at the top of the boil, and other signs; and you must make the puncture where the boil hangs down most or where it opens more readily, and the puncture should be long like a reed. If the boil is on the hands or feet, or in joints near nerves and arteries, or in any flat place without wrinkle."
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In cases where it pleases, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you delay its perforation until it is confirmed by proper digestion accomplished, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it beforehand, the body of the venom will spread out, and it will be filled with much filth; and perhaps the edges and depth of it will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And some abscesses should be pierced according to the size of the body, according to what is necessary for the members.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must bring small incisions for small abscesses, small perforations; and for large abscesses, large perforations, and many slits according to the likeness of the size of the abscess; and there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut into the heart, and cover; when they have become as hard as earthenware, and have softened, then one must do likewise as one does for boils: And there are such that are split into three angles, and there are such whose covering is done like a mint leaf, as abscesses of the angels; And there are such where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, like soft superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them plainly; and when the abscess is large, and it has drawn much bow, and you pierce it, then do not draw out all the bow at once, but draw out a part; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again afterwards; do this many times gradually, until all the bow comes out; likewise if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or elderly decrepit men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Sometimes the spirit jumps with the release of the bow, causing the patient to die unexpectedly.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat this chapter with great care. After you have pierced your abscess, open the wound and examine whether the wound from the abscess is small; if it's a full cut, bring linen or old cotton bandages. If it's a large abscess with many openings, stuff each one with a bandage so they meet each other. If there's a piece of skin cut from the abscess that you've cleaned around, fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth without moisture, and bind it for three days; then remove it and treat it with ointment until it's healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	If bleeding occurs during your procedure, bring cold water and vinegar, wet the cloth, and place it repeatedly on the bleeding area.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding continues, you should apply treatment and care, using the powders I have mentioned earlier in this book. If it is wintertime, and the place where the abscess is located is very nerve-rich, then you must put warm wet cloths on it, soaked in wine and oil. But if it is summertime, and the area is fleshy, then you should apply wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for three days as we have stated. Then remove the abscess, cleanse it, and treat it until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	"And this is what one must know universally about the treatment of boils: I have told you how to proceed with the treatment of boils, and here is that chapter."
des soros	"boils"
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	And on the head, small abscesses appear, like those that are found in the flesh, similar to a goose's gizzard, and there are many such.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and moist like pigeons; and there are also those that are hard and stony to the touch. There is no doubt that if an artery is present.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting is that you examine all instruments called 'entromissoire', from which the shape comes later, which thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	But if it contains moisture, you should wipe it with something long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied, scrape it without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, because it returns immediately if you leave anything; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it's present; if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound, and leave it until the next day; and these are the things that remain of the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third day, until you know that there is no moisture left; then dress the wound with suitable ointment, until it's clean.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the boil holds much fat, cut it according to this shape with something long; and throw your bandages on it, scrape all around it, and make sure all your efforts go into drawing out the coat where it resides; and if the artery opposes you, do what I said later.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And likewise do with an abscess if it is hard, and when cutting and healing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	Cutting into a hard and moist abscess makes it easier because there is less blood involved.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there are some abscesses whose heads have no moisture, and among these was an abscess that I cut open on the head of an old woman; I found the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be broken; and if one had struck it with an axe, it would have done as much harm as striking a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	For other abscesses that come to the head, especially those that occur on the heads of children and at the roots of ears, open them always in the lowest possible place so that they may drain better; and heal them as is necessary.
des scrophules	"scrophules"
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin; sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and they are often connected to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each boil is properly situated within its own bone, as with the wound and abscess of the head, as we have said; and the types of these boils are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are evil ones that refuse to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Therefore, for the one that appears well-disposed to touch and is similar in color to the flesh, and moves from each part and is not hard to the nerves of the neck nor the artery nor the vessel, and is not deep; then you should cut it open on top, scrape it from both sides, and draw out the two lips of the wound with forceps if necessary, as we have said for head abscesses; and remove it bit by bit, ensuring that you do not cut into the nerve or vein, nor slip with the scalpel too deeply, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not let you work, place powdered vitriol in the wound, or some powders that stop blood flow, hold the wound closed until the abscess quiets down, and the wound softens and begins to decay.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And once the blood is stopped, return to your work until you finish it; then search on your thumb for any small scabs, cut them and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, you should not cut that scab at its base, but tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it fall off on its own without harm; then cover the wound with cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and dress it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the entire scab, then you must bring together both edges of the wound and stitch them securely, so that there remains no excess due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary for you to understand how to grasp the root of it, and draw forth fire, and then stitch it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that hold excessiveness, pierce where it opens, and pierce in the manner of those previously mentioned, depending on it. Then apply dressings with ointment and similar things so that they corrupt what remains from corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with anointing around the flesh until it is healthy.
de squinance	"Squinting"
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	"The ancients spoke of the cutting of the throat, but I have never seen it done in our land, and that is what their writings say."
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	"For those who squint, the epiglottis must be avoided; no help is to be given by this means, because all veins and arteries of the sick person are in the mouth or throat."
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	"When the disease is in the channel of the artery, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis in order to avoid suffocation."
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it below three circles or four, with a small cut across between two circles or according to the quantity of the soft palate's cut, not in the cartilage; and these places are suitable for sectioning the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from there.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, then extend the skin of the throat throughout the entire neck, then cut the heart until it reaches the throat. Avoid any visible blood vessels and then grasp the soft palate as we have said. This is proven by the cutting of the pharyngeal vein which emits fire from the broken place, and by the loss of voice; leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when the danger of strangulation has passed, bring together the two lips of the wound in the chest and stitch them closed without including the cartilage. Then apply medications that promote the growth of flesh until it is healed."
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	"Albucasis says that one should not perform this procedure until the throat is completely blocked, the patient is judged to be near death, and the fault lies with the air passages."
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then grasp the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow and breathes through the wound, thus avoiding death. And so the ancients ordered that the wound be left open until the heat of the disease has passed, which takes three or four days. Then they commanded that the wound be stitched up and dressed until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young woman took the knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting some of the channels of the lung. And I was called to heal her, but found her dead also.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	"I examined the wound and found that there was blood coming from it, and I realized that she had not cut any vein or artery except for the throat, and air was escaping through the wound."
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened and stitched the wound and healed it until it was healthy. And there was no other harm to the young woman besides her voice being hoarse, which returned afterwards to its former state; therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis one need not fear.
de la grosse gorge	"Of the enlarged throat"
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This aposteme is called 'hernia of the throat', and it is a large abscess with the color of a liver, most common in women. There are two kinds: natural and accidental; but the natural one has no engine (cause).
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident occurs in two ways: one is similar to fatty tissue, and the other manner is like an abscess that comes from an artery. There should be fear in these cases, but surgery with fire can only be done in those that are small, and it must be proved and searched for throughout the intramuscular area: if you find it as hard as a nut and not connected to any vein, cut it out like you would a boil, and remove all its covering if there is any; then examine everything carefully and treat it as necessary until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	"Of fatty tumors"
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many kinds of boils, all of which I will describe their similarities; and now I must tell you the difference between a boil and an ulcer.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	"I say that an exostosis is hot and febrile until the inflammation has passed, and the putrefaction is complete. Then the fever and heat subside."
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the nodule, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains lymph, which is its own sac and appears according to the color of the body, and begins like a jar, and becomes large; and they are similar in two ways, either fatty or moist, and most have the colors I mentioned in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	"When you come to treat a nodule, it is necessary to first examine and explore the entire introitus with an instrument called 'intromitto'"
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of examining the swellings is that you take the moistest spot you find on the swelling and twist your fingers bit by bit until you know that the point has pierced the core, then according to the size of the swelling; then extract the lancet, being careful not to let anything spill.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If running moisture is clear in color, then cut it as I said for other swellings; and if after the lancet no moisture comes forth, know that it is fatty, so cut it in a cross, take it with forceps, and scrape it lightly on each side, guarding the skin where it lies that you draw it out clean with the nodule; and if you cannot draw it out clean, then draw it out in pieces until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If anything remains there, then the wound returns many times; and if a bit remains and the blood begins to fester, then cover the wound with some corrosive waters, bind the wound tightly, apply soothing things to the hot abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed. And if the wound is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat those that enter the flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	"And if the veins beat against you or otherwise, hurry and fill the wound with powdered vitriol, and let it lie for two or three days until the wound rots, and then rest the ebullition of the blood; then return to cauterize what remains of the boil."
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the shapes of the instruments for entering wounds, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. There are four square ones called "albaret" and one called "breb". They also come in three sizes to encircle fistulas: large, medium, and small. These are like the needles used to sew up wounds, made of tin, iron, or silver. The golden ones are most valuable and are especially preferred for encircling the openings of fistulas. They come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of onions are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are onions that have two loops of three kinds each; and there are also onions with three loops, which are also of three kinds; and there are onions with two loops and onions with one loop only, and they are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these tools are cutting, and there are some that do not cut much more than one side, with which one strips the nerves so as not to injure the vein or nerve; and among these probes are those replied in hands, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are used mostly in fleshy places such as legs, arms, breasts, angles, and similar places; and sometimes another tool is made, like a fistulectomy probe according to this shape, with which blood is staunched.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	"And it is placed sometimes at the location where veins and arteries are cut, and sometimes they are made according to this large shape:"
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when those begin to be corrupted, until they resemble female breasts; and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to treat them, should do so according to this form from line .b. to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape away the fat and cover the wound with medicine smearing flesh together, then sew up the two lips of the wound and treat it until it heals; and if the breast hangs downwards and is softened due to its size as happens with women, cut it into two parts above through two similar incisions; so that one end holds onto the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from this line .b. to line .g.; then scrape away the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and arrange what we have said about sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment until it heals; and if it does not heal or if the incision was not completely made because the patient cannot rest or due to bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; leave it until it consumes the remainder and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	"Regarding boils in the armpits"
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	"These boils that appear under the arms are usually hard scrophulæ with corners, and some contain moisture."
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this shape, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when all the bone that is in the boil has been emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and heal it with appropriate ointment until it is healed."
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	"And if the boil resembles a scrofula, then cut it like we have said for incisions of scrofulæ, and if the wound contracts bone, then bring about cautery as we have said before."
de la routure de l’artere	"Regarding the rupture of an artery"
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is severed, and the skin above it is closed, then an abscess often forms, and likewise when a vein is enlarged and there is an abscess; and one can thus recognize this when it is for the artery, so the abscess is long and deep; and when you feel it with your two hands, you sense its hardness; and when it is for the vein, so it appears reddish and inflamed; and it is foolish to cut into this abscess, especially when it is under the buttocks and in the corners and at the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, one must avoid cauterizing with fire, and especially the head, and also avoid inflaming an artery by cutting through the skin above it; then make an incision at the corners, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed; then place a needle underneath, and pierce it until it comes out on the other side, and tie the artery with two threads in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then prick the point between the two ties with an introducer until the blood flows out there, and remove the abscess; then apply a bandage in such a way that the ligature falls off; then treat it with ointment suitable for this purpose until it is healed. And if the abscess is due to an incision of the vein, then you must tie your hand to the abscess everywhere on the skin, then place the needle underneath where you are holding with your hand, and pierce it through, with one double thread so that you can pull it out from the other side; then tie the abscess as I have said, tying the ligature of one of two parts with two heads of the threads; and if you doubt whether the threads have been sewn correctly, then insert another needle under all the threads along the entire length of the abscess at the incision point of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places; then cut into the abscess until the superfluity comes out; then cut away the superfluity from the heart and leave what is tied. Then place a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, then apply bandages and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	"Abscesses of the nerves"
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	"So just like abscesses come from the artery and vein when they are pierced or by excessive work, abscesses also come to nerves when they are wounded, and similar things."
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens most often to the shoulders and toes, and in all places where there are joints; it is the serious swellings, and its color appears like the color of the body, and it is found in many dispositions without pain. And when it is pressed strongly, the patient feels pain, but not deep within the body, rather beneath the chest; and it moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor down nor up, and one that is in joints should not be covered with iron: perhaps contraction would occur; and those that are on the head or forehead, make the skin smooth.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is small, then grasp it with tongs and cut it at its root; but if it is large, then suspend it from an onion, scrape it off, then cleanse and join the wound together with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	"On large hanging pouches"
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in bellies and not elsewhere; and it is an illness called 'fungus' due to its similarity; and the roots are fine, and the heads large; and there are some small ones and very large ones. I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, with no difference between them, they were white, with fine roots and jagged edges, and moisture constantly flowed from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I weighed them and found one to be XVIII ounces heavy, the other VI З. The work of the incision is such that you should look if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a subtle root; then cut it at the spatula's wide edge, and have the cautery ready by fire in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	But when cutting comes too much blood flow, if your blood fails you, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient fearful and afraid of iron incision, take a well-made thread of lead, and tie it around the artery as we have said, leaving it for two days. Then restrain it, and do not cease pulling on the thread of lead until you cut the artery, then pull it out without effort; if the roots are large, fear cutting itself for the belly, but you can well cut halfway, then cauterize so it does not return; then treat the wound, guarding that you do not cut the sheath which is reddish in color and poor in sense, containing milk secretion.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an enchanted aposteme, and I will come to the cure of cancer later on.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil bursts
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the swelling occurs from cauterization of a wound or tear in the scrotum, and is on the belly, and in some cases affects the testicles as happens with other injuries, or from blood coming from veins or arteries, according to what is said before, or from windiness; and if it's from a tear in the scrotum and an opening in the testicle, then the color of the swelling resembles the color of the flesh, and it's a light thing without pain, and has various openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the outlet of the intestines, then it is more diverse. And when you press it with your fingers it disappears and then returns. And sometimes it is hard and enlarged greatly at the entrance of the bath and from intense labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's from moisture, it's a light thing, and opens up well when you press it with your hand, without constraining; and if it's from blood, then the swellings are large and hard, and appear according to their quantity; and if it's from windiness, it's soft to the touch, and the appearance is such that you should look to see if it's from arterial or venous blood, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary for you to leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear about it, as I told you in the chapter on boils, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or for the boil, then you must command the patient to tie his loincloth, and be stretched out completely straight, then kneel at the foot of the bed; then he should lie down on his back between your hands, then go around the spot that you have marked with all the spatula, then extend half of the boil upwards with all the great unguent; then tie it tightly around with a strong thread or a strong silk cord, and let the knot be well fastened; then open half of the boil stretched out over the ligature, and put your index finger inside, and seek the intestine; if you find it caught in the ligature, untie it and put the intestine back into its place in the belly; and if you find the boil, take it at the root and cut off the excess; and if the artery or vein opposes you, go gently around, then return to your work and take two needles, and attach two strong threads, and insert the two needles crossed where you pierced them; then hold the boil in four places on the needles, and if you see it swell, remove the needles and leave the spot until it rots, and scrape away the dead flesh; or cut it when it is ripe and rotted, then treat the place as necessary, and cut open the boil as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as necessary, and sew up the wound.
dou chancre	Here is an old French recipe for treating a chancre (a type of ulcer):
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	"Of the kinds of cancer we have spoken about in the section, and how one must treat them with medicines, and how to avoid the cure by iron; and we say that cancer which has invaded the marrow requires great caution in its treatment. The ancients said that when cancer is located where it can be removed, like those on the breast or hip, and similar locations, it should all be cut out at the beginning. But when it is large and old, do not approach it, for I have never seen anyone cured of it; nor has anyone else before me."
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And the operation, when it is in a location where it can be removed, as we have said, involves purging the patient of black bile. Then make him vomit if he shows signs of repletion, and then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the operation. Then cut out your incisions or cancer, and remove all hair around it, and remove everything without leaving anything behind. Let the blood flow freely, and squeeze the wound with your hand or some other object, and if the bleeding is too much from the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. Then heal it with another cure until it is healed."
de ydropisie	I have not found any mention of "ydropisie" in the text you provided. Is there a specific section or topic related to this that you would like me to summarize?
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already spoken in the division about the likenesses of dropsy, and how the gathering of water is done, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: only 'eclites' [dropsy] is mentioned; and one should not touch with iron in these two likenesses: namely, tympanites and hippocrates, for they are deadly things; therefore when you treat this likeness of dropsy called 'eclites' with medicines, and the cure does not help, then look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as consumption and similar things; do not touch him with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient to be of strong virtue, and he has no other disease but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should act thus: raise the patient upright on your hands, and the assistants press the belly outwards by pushing water at the lowest part of the breast, then take the spatula spinous according to this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut in two.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And then pierce the skin with this tool, and be careful not to cut so deep that it reaches the intestines when you insert it, nor should it cause bleeding. Then observe whether dropsy has entered near the intestines: if so, make your incision three fingers' breadth directly below the navel; but if dropsy is due to liver disease, make your incision on the left side of the belly button; and if it's due to worms, make it on the right side. Ensure that the patient does not lie upon the incision so that superfluities do not run into this weak area. Then pierce all the skin with this tool, insert it, and lift your hand so that the spatula is between the skin and the fascia just as in flaying, to the depth of a nail or somewhat around. Then pierce the fascia until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is the location of water; then draw forth this tool, and into this opening insert this tool whose shape is thus:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a subtle silver chain, and is of light arrow or iron, and has in the lower part one small hole; and on one side three holes; and two on another side; and one on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision with which writers cut feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And at the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it lets it now fall on the instrument; empty then a half or a third part, for if you empty more than necessary at this time, perhaps the patient will die from the dissolution of his spirit by the weapon, or he falls unconscious, or he approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the sick person's virtue signify, and his pulse; then draw the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now by the heart that stops the hole that is on the face, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then begin the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient enduring this, and draw a little quantity of water; do this for some days, and take care not to let it remain too long but just a drop of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water on them, then cure it with hot burial or sand, and often sweat, bath or sun, and coloring to drink; and cure it with drying medicines until it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	"Regarding the swelling of the penis:"
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without any opening in their penis, or with a small one, or one not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary that it be pierced at once with the finest stilette according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then place the fine platinum cap into the opening and tie it up and hold it thus for 3 or 4 days. When it wants to urinate, remove the cap and let it do so, then put it back on; sometimes no cap may be needed as the urine coming from within does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose wound is small are treated with the cloth of lead, as we have said; it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the opening in its place are burned, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating until they raise their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the bladder, and this is a harmful condition.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And the method of operation is this: the patient lies on his back, then lift up the tip of the penis and cut it like a feather until the opening falls in the middle, as it should. Be careful not to let too much blood flow out, for this happens often; if it does happen, stop the bleeding with whatever stops bleeding, and heal the wound until it is completely healed."
des pustules de la verge	"Regarding the blisters on the penis:"
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Many times these blisters appear on the penis, forming an ugly appearance of skin. Some are malignant and others are not; they must be taken with a very fine onion, cut out, and all cleaned up, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then treat with diafinicon ointment until they are completely healed."
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the wound is malignant, of foul color and stinking, then you must bring fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it out, and if the wound is on top of the penis, with part inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the wound that is inside; and when it is healed, then treat the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if you treat them together, the head of the penis is not assured that it will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come into its skin and scrotum; so all that is black and corrupted must be cut away, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour mixed with grated pomegranate rind and figs, then treat it with other remedies until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a discharge of blood occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And the cauteries help in two conditions together: namely, for the discharge of blood and corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and drawn back, then you should insert or conduct through it a tube of lead, and let the patient piss among it. And when the skin at the head of the penis becomes sore, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or which occurs because of a wound or abscess, then you must scrape it with the hairy instrument until the ligature is untied and the penis is delivered from all parts. And if it is difficult to separate these, then you should scrape it somewhat with the spatula at the head of the penis and skin; then carefully dissect between them, and put a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water there, so that it does not become sore again.
de la circoncision	"Of circumcision"
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	"Circumcision is not like other wounds that heal by themselves; however, when we perform this operation of our own will, especially on children, it is necessary to do the best and easiest work for salvation."
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	"I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children because it was not customary in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience."
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	"Because I have seen the greatest part of the masters and seniors who performed circumcisions using only one knife, sometimes for boys and sometimes with a novacula; thus it happens that the glans remains bare because there are two layers [of skin], and sometimes they cut the upper one and leave the lower one."
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	"But then they cover it [the glans], and the pain is doubled; and at the time of washing, the tip of the member is not securely exposed; and sometimes during the washing of the wound, the instrument slips and wounds the operation, and many times they are born like this so that they do not need any further dressing, as I have seen."
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	"Concerning the washing that is done on boys with all the length of thread, I have found through experience that this method is good because boys cut evenly both above and below."
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand thus, cut evenly throughout the whole time; but let the thread be well stretched around the skin; and make the manner of the first operation such that you cause the child to think, if it hears, that you are doing nothing but tie the thread around the stick only, and then let him enjoy all the ways that you can; then make him stand upright between your hands, and hide the forceps between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the stick and blow onto the heart, and pull it up until the head of the stick is inside; then clean it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the left side with a double thread, then tie it under the first knot to the other knot; and hold it with two fingers by the second knot near the pouch and index finger, and cut between the two knots, then quickly raise the heart up and pull out the head of the stick; then let the blood flow freely, for this is the mucus; and put powder on it and on the powder a strip of gauze stuck with a cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, mixed with good fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	"The form of the foreskin at the time of washing should be like this: the two layers [of skin] should be thin and cut evenly, and each layer should be as large as the middle finger."
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	"The error in washing is when the glans is inside the incision; therefore, you must stretch it with your thumb before the edges adhere and close up, then cut it evenly; if you cannot hold it with your thumb, use tweezers to cut it."
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	"And if three days have passed and the skin below the penis is swollen, let it be until the inflammation has subsided, then gently scrape off the scab; cut it as much as you can move it, but be careful not to harm the penis itself."
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Then treat the wound with the soothing powder that we have described earlier, and if too much of the glans is cut and it retracts upwards, do not worry about it; treat it as we have said until it heals."
dou retenement de l’urine	Of urine retention
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or coagulated blood, or bowels, or flesh born, or similar things, as we have said in the division. And if the urine is not released, and you see that there is retention due to a stone that lies in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to bend over his knees; and let him put his feet on his back, and extend his belly from above where the back is located, and let the patient constrain himself as much as he can; and therefore the neck of the bladder is forced upwards to expel the stone above, so that the urine may be released. And if it does not come forth, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instruments called 'syringe', whose form is as follows: let it be of fine, light silver, like the feather of a bird; and let the tube be one and a half palms long, and let it be fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of issuing urine is thus: Take one doubled thread, and tie it to the top of a wad of wool or cotton, and insert the thread's end into the syringe; then cut off the excess wool and place it up to the syringe's top, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and dove's egg, and make the patient sit on a seat, and rise his bladder and penis with moistened oil and olive oil and hot water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis upward towards the belly; then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and when the patient feels it reach the empty space, and if this is not done correctly, it may be because the duct it passes through is twisted; then pull out the thread with all the wool wad by wad, and let the urine follow the wool, then remove the syringe, and make the urine flow; and repeat the process until the bladder is emptied, and the patient feels relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When the bladder is injured or contains blood, or is filled with decay and you see water and medicine dripping out of it, then use all the instruments called "clepsydra", its shape is:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the high places are raised so that the medicine cup fits well without additional support, allowing for drawing out moisture when needed, and inserting when necessary. When you observe your medicines entering the bladder, place the spout of the syringe in the moisture, and draw out the fluid within. Then strongly reinsert the tube, so the moisture enters and reaches the bladder, making the patient feel it. This is the shape of the delicate clyster used to administer a clyster to the bladder: thus it is here.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	It is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher; and below it has one breast where the strings hang. Then take a sheep's bladder and put into it the moisture with which you wish to administer the clyster to the bladder. Then tie it between the two breasts firmly with a doubled thread, and heat this moisture on the fire until it boils. Then insert the spout of the clyster into the tube, and press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has entered it, so that the patient feels it has reached the bladder. And if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it roundly around the edge. Then insert a strong thread into these holes, and gather the circle together like a funnel, and put within it what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it onto the instrument. And do as you have done with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	de la moistor
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of treating stones and extracting them together with medicines; and I have mentioned the difference between stones that are stuck in the kidneys and all their signs, and in which stones surgery should be performed; and in the bladder and in the urethra; and I will tell you about it clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones which are stuck in the bladder happen more often to children, and this is a sign that urine flows out of the bladder appearing like urine in its fineness; and it opens easily, and the patient grates his urethra, and he frequently pants, and then he becomes rigid; and many times these are the cause of inflammation. And it is easy to cure stones in children until they are four years old, but difficult in old people, and moderate in young people, those between youth and old age. And it is easier to treat those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For sometimes it hinders seeking the stone
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and lower them and move them below, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it rises from its high place; then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards; then search for it and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut upon the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall at the touch of all, then moist your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is fully grown; and put it in his anus, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press upon it with your finger, and push it towards that side where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out his right hand with the scrotum upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is under the scrotum in the part where the incision is made; then I put the spatula copant, which is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make between what is between the thighs and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh; and let it be straight upon the stone, and your two hands always upon the fundament, and let the blow of the hammer be such that it is wide at the front and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; by chance the pressure might cause the stone to expel without labor; and know that there are stones with angles and margins: those are difficult to remove; and there are some that are beneath, similar to a grape, round, from which the exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	Therefore, for those stones that have angles and margins, make the cut wider; and if it does not expel, then you must extract with tongs which are like a chisel at the end, to move and grasp the stone so that it does not escape; or you put underneath it a subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot maneuver thus, then widen the small hole where the passage is, and if blood flows out, then stop it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first place the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut upon it, then let it expel, and afterwards extract the smaller ones if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then one must make a larger cut.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	If two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out continuously from where the wound cannot heal. Nevertheless, strive to draw it out with forceps, or cut it with pincers, until you pull it out in pieces. And when you have completed your work, then dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it up, and lay upon it a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to cool the hot inflammation. Then swathe the patient around his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie him, then rinse the wound very well with oil and water, then apply ointment of diaphoretic balm and ointment of Basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot inflammation comes to the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained in such a way that it cannot pass out with the urine: then make an incision into the wound, and extract that blood, for if any remains there, it will corrupt the bladder. Then cleanse the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and aid him in every way that you know until he is healthy. And it is necessary that all the times that you treat him, you bind his two thighs together, and apply the medicines to the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it's in the path of the tube, and stuck inside, and urine cannot come out; then do what I said before, that you cut it many times, except this time use a curette to perform the cutting.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod made in this shape and having three points sharpened into one piece of charcoal:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take some thread and tie it around the tube below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder. Then insert the drill into the tube gently until it reaches the stone. Then turn the drill in your hand against the stone a little bit at a time, until you can pierce the stone from the other side. Then urine will soon come out, and then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is still inside the tube.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is soon broken and comes out with the urine, then the patient is healed. And if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, then tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the tube at the stone between the two threads, then extract it with forceps, untie the thread, and clean the wound of any congealed blood; and continue treating it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	Of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens sometimes that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does happen occasionally, its cure is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons: one is because perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-informed who dares to uncover herself before physicians, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that sometimes one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more hidden than that of the man, therefore it must make a deeper cut, and there is great fear involved. And if you need someone for this, then you should take a skilled midwife, and barely can she be found, and if you cannot find one, look for at least an expert physician; and present her with a wise woman knowledgeable in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to perform what you command concerning the examination of the stone; and observe very carefully whether the woman is virgin: then she must place her thumb on the fundament and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she should press it down with her thumb, and recommend that she places her thumb in the vulva of the patient, and feel and press her left hand strongly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, then she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder downwards until she reaches the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the groin, where it is moved and well displayed, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your hand above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first; then place the chisel in the incision, if you feel the stone so close to the wound that the stone can come out through fire, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know these similarities in order to know the outcome
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if blood wins you over, then put ground vitriol in place, and hold it there for an hour until the blood is stanched; then return to your work until the stone is out, and have tools ready that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to help you in your task; and if blood wins you over again, and it comes from the artery that was cut, then put powder on the wound and hold it with bandages and cloths, and do not recommence this, and leave the stone alone and do not pull it out, lest by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the wound can be borne again, then return to your task until the stone is removed.
de hernie carnouse	Carnous hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquous hernia is nothing other than an accumulation of moist or white matter that is under the heart of the testicles, which contains the egg; and it is called "spermatozoa," and sometimes it is actually in the wall of the egg, so that one might think it is another egg. And this is the skin of the testicle between the white spermatozoa that we have spoken about; and this does not happen unless there is pressure.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the cause of this hernia is weakness in the testicles, which allows this matter to become spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it arises from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: where it is declining towards jaundice, or colorless, or black, or watery white, and these are more; and these are signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is whitish like we have said, then the abscess is ripe, as long as the shape of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess is ripe with part of the egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the whites, one feels it well. Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the intruding squarely, from which its shape is here before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introduction, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we cut it with iron, the patient must be healthy according to his power and the fullness of his body; then have him lie on his back, on something slightly high, and put many cloths underneath him. Then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on the right, and extend the wand to one of the two ribs of the heart of the joints. Then take the spatula and cut the skin of the joints in its proper place, from the long incision near the hilt, and let your incision be straight, dividing the skin of the joints up to the whites. Then carefully scrape it according to your power; then pierce the white full of water with a wide hole, and drain out all the water, then put on your bandages, and stretch the white upwards; and do not touch the heart of the joints, but only the white. Cut everything evenly or in pieces from its edge carefully, so that if you do not cut it well, the water will return. And if the egg slips during your work, reset it in its place when you have finished the work of the white. Then sew the two leaves of the heart of the joints together with a suture, then cure it like other wounds until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you find that the egg is corrupted by another illness, then tie up the vessels hanging there to prevent bleeding. Then cut through the rib cage along with everything attached to it and remove the egg. Treat it as described above.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if water is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part as you did the first evenly, then squeeze out the blood, and place in the wound clean wool moistened in rose oil. And put on top of the two wounds another wool moistened in wine and oil, and put over them doubled cloths, and bind it all together according to this form
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and fill them with wool lint according to this shape and have them sewn together at the waistband of the breeches, and one end should lie on top of the buttocks up to the back, and the other at the wrist area; and the two ends should be held over the two angles, and all the bandage should be gathered in the loop of the breeches. And sometimes this branch is medicated with cauterization instead of iron cutting, and it is that you take one scalpel cautery instrument, and cut into the skin of the wounds, and heat it as we have said so that the white blister which contains the water becomes visible; then take the cautery according to this form, and prick that blister once with it, and scrape off this blister with this fine hot cautery
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut in every way that you can, until you remove all; and ensure that the fire does not touch the eye; and know that this work is more saving; and move carefully to avoid blood loss, and cover the wounds with dressings; and if anything opposes you, whether it's an abscess, blood flow, or other things, then treat what opposes you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and cannot endure this procedure because of its horrifying nature, then perform a perforation, as I tell you. And when you are certain that there is no sign of aquatic humor, make the patient sit on a raised seat; then cut through the abscess at the lower part with a wide scalpel, and insert the perforation tube into the long bone of the body; ensure the hole is large enough for all the fluid to flow freely. Then place cotton on the wound and bind it, leaving room for the remaining fluid to drain. Next, dress the wound until it heals. And if the bandage does not allow fluid to escape through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a pen or the instrument used to treat hydrocele, the shape of which is shown above. Then enlarge the wound and know that the fluid will collect again after six months or so, and when it collects as before, the patient's days will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	"Treatment of an abscess on the testicles"
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the cutting of this vein there is fear and many dispositions, therefore it seems to me that it would be better if one lets it alone; and I will tell you the work and the similitudes of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, many abscesses come upon the body, especially upon the testicles; this is very common.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to be known that from sour and bitter superfluity spread over the joints or from percussion; and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and it does not find pain; and the abscess is severe; and sometimes there are few painful and piercing abscesses, and with foul color, and some come from an artery or inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and one must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	That which is made from inflammation of a vein is known by its disposition at the expression of the touch of the fingers; and one can well make the incision upon this semblance and upon other parts; and it is that you cut the joint of the bones, then stretch the egg upwards, and let go the white mucus through the suspensory ligament in all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already hard-boiled with these hairs attached, then you should remove the egg, and its shell; if it's air-filled at the surface, or in that which is inside the vessels, then you must deliver all of this membrane, and roundly remove the shell.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	"And if the origin of the growth is behind, you must cut it all out and remove the egg as we have said."
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And once your operation is complete, cover the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then dress it with other dressings until it heals."
de l’aposteme des coions	"Treatment of an abscess on the testicles"
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a boil covered by an wrapping resembling wool, with softening of the tissues, and the patient cries out when it moves; yet the treatment for this disease is quite fearful just as those mentioned earlier, but nonetheless we will tell you its operation according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	The patient should sit on an elevated seat. Then place the suspensory ligament of the testicles downward on your two fingers near the vessel close to the penis, and grasp it with your master finger, extending it firmly. Next, cut widely across the skin with a sharp scalpel over the vessels until they are exposed. Then strip back the skin from both sides as we have described for the extraction of temporal arteries. Insert a needle with double thread where the vein emerged first, tie it to the initial point, then tie it again at the other end. Cut along the middle correctly according to the length of the body and remove the corrupted moisture. Then treat the wound like others where a bowel has been inserted, ensuring that no vessels are cut which nourish one of the testicles; for through these no harm comes, but if veins come from all vessels, then draw the testicles from all vessels so that the scrotum does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels.
de la routure dou syfac	"On the rupture of the sinews"
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The event of this rupture happens due to the cutting that comes from below, or the stretching over the belly in the area of the groin, which causes the intestines to descend through one of the openings; and this opening is either from the caecum or from its stretching. There are two ways these ruptures come about, many times: either by impact, or jumping, or heavy lifting, or similar causes; And the sign when it's due to stretching of the caecum is that it happens gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly; and the abscess is even all the way to its depth because the caecum presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	"And the sign that it is a section of the sinew is that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there is diverse inflammation apparent under the skin near the surface, due to the issue of the intestine and the body's retreat from the sinew."
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	"And sometimes the loops also descend with the intestine, becoming trapped there and causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed."
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	"And in these cases of iron poverty, why one must avoid this cure:"
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	The manner of performing this procedure is that you instruct the patient to put their hand inside the wound if they can; then lie on their back between your hands and raise their thighs; then stretch the heart upwards and cut all the long skin of the groin; then insert hooks of the hips as needed to open the wound, so large that the egg can come out; then scrape off the caecum which is under the skin of the groin until the hard white caecum is exposed on all sides; then put your right index finger into what leads towards the groin between the first caecum and the second one behind the bladder, and pull apart what is behind the bladder and between the second caecum; and then move your right hand inside the skin of the groin, and stretch the white caecum upwards with your left hand, and lift the bladder together with all the caecum towards the hips; and instruct the assistant to hold up the bladder and loosen what is behind it; and check with both hands if there is any intestine wrapped around the hard white caecum, and if you find anything, put it back inside the belly; then take a needle with one thick thread made of X threads, and insert it into the back part of the caecum which is after the skin of the groin; after the hips, cut the strings that appear until there are four strings; then tie them together in the shape of a cross, and tie the caecum with two strong ties, as we have said before, which is under the skin of the groin; then wrap the strings of the threads and tie them firmly with two ties so that no vessel that feeds it can enter there, and no abscess may come; and put the tie again according to the first tie two fingers away from it; and after these two ties leave one hand's width of caecum which is under the skin of the groin; and after everything else follow the roundness that the bladder has; then cut in the part that is under the skin of the groin until blood flows, and the bowels, as we have said before; then bring moistened wool in oil and put it on the wounds, and bring the tie that we have spoken about.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	"And sometimes the white sinew that we have spoken about is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding."
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Because this happens many times, and leaves the lien until it falls by itself; and if it delays in falling, then raise it with warm water, and put on what we have said until it falls; then treat the wound with another cure until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Carnous hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	"I never saw anyone who dared to perform this operation by iron."
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done like the branch that is bound together with the vis in such a way that you tie the vessels after cutting them lightly on the underside; then cut in between and treat the abscess of what opens until the vessels fall; and cure it as we have said until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes rupture occurs in the angles as we have said, and the area opens up; and no part of the intestines should come out at the joints, but if any do come out, it is little and can be repaired immediately. However, if it remains too long in this state, then gangrene or syphilis will form until the intestines come out; and this happens due to the extension of the syphilis which is in the angles as we have said, because it becomes stretched, softens and swells the area and opens up. The cure for this is cautery, as we have mentioned before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner: lie the patient on their back between your hands, then cut into the swollen area of the rupture with a knife according to the amount of three fingers wide; then remove the syphilis that is under the skin that is affected, then take a rod and place it over the open area of the syphilis, and press it deep into the abdomen. Then sew up the two open areas of the syphilis on top of the head of the rod, sewing both together. Then remove the head of the rod, but do not cut any more of the syphilis or extend the wound or anything else, as I have explained to you in the cure for the rupture of the intestines; then treat it with the treatment for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cauterize with fire, cleanse it and heal the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syringe is tightly closed and has no opening during dislocation. The cauterization is done at this stage and is closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin over the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin over the joints becomes softened in some people because the tissues inside are softened, and it is unpleasant to see. When you want to treat it, make the patient lie on his back, and cut away the softened skin from the natural skin. Then sew the two lips together with one stitch, and if necessary, first sew the excess softened skin with three or four firm stitches. Then cut between the stitches and cure it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	And know that castrations are forbidden in our law, and therefore I would like not to speak of it in this book; but there are two reasons why it is necessary: the first is so that a doctor can answer when asked about it and its treatment, and the second because we often need to castrate certain beasts for our aid, such as goats, sheep, cats, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method that we do by attraction, make the beast sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and relaxed; then grasp them with your hand until they return and you can no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	On castration by cutting: you must first tie the beast, then press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensiony ligament, and cut each testis once when they are well exposed; leave some portion of the scrotum and the subtle tunic that is over the vas deferens; this method of castration is more cruel than that done by attraction because it leaves no chance for some part of the testicles to remain, which could cause the beast to desire lust; then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism occurs in men in two ways: one is such that between the two testicles opens also like the figure of a woman's nature, or there is hair, and sometimes it emits urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way in women, they have on their pubis both a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for men and women is that you cut away all the attached skin, and dress it like other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Tengnèye
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigine is attached skin on the natural part that is too unsightly to see; some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you shave off the excess skin of the tentigine with your hand or a razor, cutting it lightly; and do not cut too deep, lest bleeding occur, then dress the wound until it heals. And there is another skin that grows at the mouth of the womb, the navel, and sometimes extends far, appearing like a cow's udder, whence the ancients called it 'cow disease.'
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must strike it, as we have discussed the cauterization, and continue treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	Erratique
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is erroneous if the nature of the woman's womb is not pierced, or if the opening is small; and it is either natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has occurred there; or it is caused by adhered flesh, or thin and subtle skin, or thick skin, and occurs deep in the marrow, or on the sides, or below, wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and sometimes flowers from being had; and its detection is through inspection of the womb.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears close by, then it seeks either your right side or left ear.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is thin and subtle skin, and it is close to the two lips, then act quickly, and thus: place your two index fingers together, with the woman lying on her back, legs spread; then press the two lips firmly until the thin skin is raised, and is over the swelling; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it there, and have the woman lie on her face each day so that it cannot adhere.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the shoulder blade is hard and thick, then you must strike it with a mallet resembling a laurel leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bandage is made of flesh, suspend it from an ox's horn and strike it with a mallet. Have ready stanching medicines such as aloes, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with yolk of egg; then apply a broad copper cauldron so that the wound cannot heal up; and do this for a long time, then apply a dry linen bandage; then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the flesh comes gangrene, then it must be cut according to this manner, unless it is a blackened abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the blackened abscess that is in the gangrene, one must not touch with fire.
des emorroides	Haemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that commonly occur without cause, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard. We have already spoken in the division about their likenesses, signs, and now I will speak of those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are deeply embedded in the flesh, and cannot be felt, then iron is not the cure.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those at the mouth of the anus, which can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Then you must put the woman in a cold house, then stretch out the hemorrhoid with forceps, and cut it at its root, then apply powder of medicines that stop bleeding, such as acacia and dragon's blood and frankincense and similar things; then place her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water. And if bleeding occurs, then have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and gall nuts and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster to apply to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, then apply cupping glasses to the back and breasts without piercing; then take linen, and soak it in comfrey juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is ripe, then treat the area with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp peak, so you must cover it as I have said earlier; and then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	"Regarding boils of the skin"
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess occur in the buttocks, such as cancer and pointed abscesses, herpes, boils, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other illnesses that I have mentioned earlier in this section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I must discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the buttocks, which is not like those that are filled with pus; and if you wish to know how to work with fire, first observe whether the abscess is growing at its beginning, full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but make it bleed until the pain ceases; then seat the patient on a chair, with two small stools where they may recline, and prop them up against their back and bring their feet together at the thigh level; let their thighs be spread apart, place their arms beneath their knees, and tie them securely with a good bandage; then squeeze the bag towards the right side, and bring forth the instrument used to open the mouth of the wound, about which there will follow its form later on; and it is necessary that when you are bringing forth this instrument, you first insert the rod in order to know the depth of the wound, so that whatever enters may not go deeper than intended nor harm the patient; and if the instrument is too large, then cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause discomfort; it is necessary that they place the funnel of the instrument on top and moisten the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the abscess opens, and it is gently cut with a scalpel in the hand, it must then be covered at its head, using a broad bandage. And when the wound is empty, you must put moistened tents into it made from rose oil or dry green oil; place them deep into the wound's marrow, and lay them on top of the marrow and around the linen cloth moistened with water where mallow or mallows have been cooked; then treat it after two days with an appropriate ointment until it is healed. And sometimes lift the bandage and the wound by enema using water and honey, and then with water in which lilies and celery roots have been cooked; then return to treating with the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is deep in the marrow, you must avoid cauterizing with fire, but treat it as we have said in its division.
de l’enfantement	Childbirth is a natural process by which a woman gives birth to a child after carrying the baby in her womb for approximately nine months. The following is an overview of the stages of childbirth and some traditional remedies used to ease discomfort:
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	First, the midwife must know the signs of natural childbirth: when she sees a woman pressing downwards and desiring to smell the air, then the child hastens to come out. Know that this childbirth is according to nature's form, with the child's head emerging first, followed by the afterbirth. When you see these signs, gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly, for when it descends onto its head, the afterbirth follows with it, and the womb is cleansed of its superfluities through good cleansing. Any child that comes otherwise is not born naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Because sometimes it happens on his feet, and the body or shoulder catches fire, and the hands, or it happens on his belly, or else, and by chance they are turned over onto his neck, and in other unfortunate shapes; so it is necessary that the bath be wise and subtle in these things, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how to aid him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	"If the infant comes forth naturally upon its head, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a stool or let women hold her; and raise her nature of oil or fenugreek cooked. Then place the little spatula between her thighs whose shape follows:"
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and split the membranes and scrape with its nail until the moisture that is inside comes out; and press on the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to administer a suppository of fennel with sesame oil to the woman; then make her sneeze with condimentum and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will be born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out first, then you must gently push them back little by little; and if they cannot enter, then make the woman sit on a chair, and raise her feet up high; then tilt the chair onto the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall during the tilting; and if the hands still cannot enter, and the child is dying, then cut off the hands at the joint that was placed there earlier, and extract the child, and reset it properly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	At the birth of a child onto its feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes onto its feet, one should raise it up. Then slowly turn it a little until it is even. Then take one of the feet and extend it a little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it can jump up to its hips, have someone hold it, and make it sneeze with mustard. If fire follows, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	"And if he does not sneeze as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is according to its natural shape."
Car adonques ist il legierement.	"For then it is easily put back in place."
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if fire does not come as we have said, then take musk, aloe juice, sesame oil, and melted gum, grind them all together in one mortar. Put this ointment on the woman's private parts, then have her sit in warm water up to her hips until she is moist below. Then put a collar of myrrh on her and place it under her, leaving it for an hour. Then have her sit on a chair, make her sneeze, hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, as the child will now come forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	"From the exit of the child onto its knees"
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, then the midwife puts her hands softly and gently; then she covers him on his neck, and let his feet hang down, and let him lie on the bed; and fold his hands softly and gently, and then she places his hands on his belly, and removes the pillows underneath until he is positioned correctly below; and if the child does not cry out, then take his feet and move them vigorously, then move his belly up, then place your hands there; and wipe the child softly and gently; and tell the woman to hold herself until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	"Regarding the child that comes out of the womb with one hand hanging down:"
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to engineer bringing back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and push her legs apart vigorously; then prepare the moss that I have described; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the chair, then try to bring back the hand; and wipe the child according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, and tell her to hold herself until the child comes out further.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth opening onto her buttocks, and has spread out its hands, and turned its face toward its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the patient take his hand, then turn it slowly and gently; and when it is even, so place upon its nature muscillaige of altee and oil, as we have said, then instruct him to move it slowly; and when you have done this, then make him sit on the seat, and instruct him to sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same way for the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When heat comes in this manner to the secondine, then cut the secondine with your nail until the moisture is emptied; and if the child leans on its face and neck, then cut from the cheek so that it is not held back, and the child dies; then put the child inside until you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to lie down several times: then it will come out easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	Regarding the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, sometimes two at a time, and rarely three or four; this is not uncommon
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things and do not live if little named; I know these, that they multiply greatly, and they are desired by the syfac which divides them, which is attached to the cheek; and sometimes they also come out naturally like a tooth, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they move out loudly, then treat them as we have said, and let the servant be skilled, and do quickly and easily what she does; and act thus as he knows how to move for healing.
de plusors enfans	"of many children"
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb for one, two, three, four, five, six, seven times, or even more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise Glorious One, and it is necessary that the servant knows everything about this, for similar things may happen; so act according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	"of a dead child"
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman with the dead child in her womb, as I have said in the division, and there is no discharge, and you are compelled by your duty to use your hands; then it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and does not have an accident or fears death; then it is necessary that the woman lie on her back, and that her head be tilted downwards, and her legs raised up; and the servant take two sheets, or tie them to the bed so she cannot slide down with the child; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils containing musk, althea, fenugreek, and linseed, then the servant anoint his hands with these oils and musks; then insert them gently into the womb, then twist it once where you inserted your fingers that are suitable for this purpose, and be careful that the child descends headfirst; then fix the sheet in its eyes or neck or mouth or throat or beard or fundament or near the ribs, and if the descent is feet first, fix it to the thigh or side; and it is necessary that you hold the sheet with your right hand, and place the curve between your left elbow and arm, and insert it gently up to where it is empty; this is the shape of the sheet.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then thrust against the other side once, or twice if needed, so that the extraction is even; then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other, for easy removal, and let the claws be even for holding firmly, as shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some part remains, then anoint the bailiff's two fingers with oil and place them in that part, and pull the other part; and if none remain, then put this claw higher up and do thus until it all comes out without force.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back because of constraint, then you must wrap a cloth around it until all is out; then cut at the joint of the sole or on the side, and likewise you must do with the other foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and narrow at the outlet, or there is a sharp-pointed assembly at its top, then you must place the spatula between your fingers and cut off the point and remove it; or round it with the tool called "almidach", whose form comes with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one; and likewise do if the child has a large natural head; and then pull out the bones with forceps, and if the head does not come out and is pressed by force, then cut it until the moisture at the foot of the outlet comes out; and if it cannot come out, then cut it in pieces as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	"And if the child is presenting by the feet, then the extraction will be easy, and the presentation at the mouth of the womb will also be easy."
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is stuck in the belly or breast, then you must pull it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and open the belly or breast until the moisture there flows out; and if other members are removed but the head remains, then place your hand deep into the marrow, and draw it up to the mouth of the marrow; then insert one or two fingers, and draw it out forcefully; and if the mouth of the marrow is constricted due to a hot abscess that has come there, then you must not work there, but rather arrange moist and fatty things; and the arrangement should include plasters, and such softening and moistening waters.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is lying on its side and you cannot make it lie flat, then arrange what we have said for a living child; and if there is no power to do so, then draw it out piece by piece, leaving nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if they come about the things that we have said regarding hot abscesses; and if discharges of blood occur, then let it be placed in cold water, restricting them, and other remedies are brought about.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	"I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been bitten by another, and the latter had died as a result."
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	"After many days, she developed an infection in her genitals, which swelled until it opened and began to emit a foul odor."
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	"I was summoned to treat her, and after examining her for some time, I could not heal the wound."
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	"I applied a poultice with strong drawing properties, and eventually two bones came out."
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	"I was very astonished at this, since the belly has no bones."
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	"Then I thought that these must be the bones of a dead child."
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I saw the wound and drew out many bones until the woman was much improved; and the woman lived for a long time thereafter, but sometimes a little bit of bone came out of its place. And I have recorded this chapter only because when masters find something unusual, they know how to provide assistance.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	"to replace the womb in its proper position"
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	"Hereafter comes the form of the forceps, with which books are opened; and there are two turns at the two ends of the two handles."
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more delicate than the restraint, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the wood should be two fingers wide, and its edge one finger wide, and half a palm long; and inside the two hinges there should be two joints of this same wood, which are fastened on both ends, being half a palm long or a little more; and these two joints are placed in the mouth of the wound to open it when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling tongs; and it should have two heads with two attachments each, one palm long and two fingers wide. When you open the mouth of the instrument completely, have the woman sit on the bed, her feet dangling and her legs spread apart. Then insert both attachments together into the mouth, holding the head of the instrument under her thighs. Then open your hand fully along the instrument, just as you would with tongs, according to how much you want to open the mouth of the instrument so that the ball may come out as she wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all mounted and multiplied in their likeness; and when the physician has prepared them, the more hastily the work is done, the higher they are among men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disdain any instrument that you have not prepared, because their necessity cannot be excused.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you should command the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze with gentian, and constrain your hands over her mouth and nose. If she expels it thereby, that is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, then take the pot, and make a hole in its cover, and place herbs inside that can open the mouth of the dead person, such as calamint, rue, anise, camomile, cassialine, and centory; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in the pot with water over the fire. Then place one end of a tube into the hole of the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the dead person, and hold it until the vapors enter the corpse. Then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondine comes out quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment and is not revived, then order the maidservant to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or musk lilac ointment, and then place it on the nature, and seek the secondine. And when she finds it, grasp it gently and extend it bit by bit straightly, so that the corpse does not fall during extraction; but it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then pulled out. Then it will come forth and be released.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	Now if the mouth of the womb is too narrow, we have said the cure for sneezing, and fumigation with herbs. And if it does not improve from all that we have said, then make sure you do not touch; but what is at the mouth of the womb must be tied to the thigh of the woman, then perform a cleansing with tetraplmaction ointment. Then she will pass it and return it, and fire will come.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	"Therefore, it is necessary to perform fumigations with these [ingredients]: none of the ancients have proven fumigation with watercress and dried figs."
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	"The form of the instrument with which one fumes the woman to retain the fetus and the afterbirth is this:"
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like this in appearance: place the subtle head upon its nature, and widen the openings over the fire. Perform fumigation on hot coals, until the pitch is exhausted, then begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born with the anus not pierced, but sealed by a subtle membrane: therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this membrane at its tip, and not to touch it with a sharp instrument, guarding herself so that she does not touch it; then place moistened linen in wine and oil, then apply ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	"And if you doubt that it may close up again, then put a tube of lead into the hole and leave it there for several days, and remove it when the child is ready to go to bed."
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	"And sometimes this stoppage comes from a sudden wound or an abscess; therefore one must cut off that sudden growth: if it is cured, then treat it as we have said for the lead tube."
de la fistule dou fondement	of a fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come underneath the fundament are nodations, and growths that come beside the fundament deface, or in the space of both parts, so there is one fistula or several; and when this nodation is ancient, it aches, and produces moist white blainche or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas persist; and they are known by those who see them in evacuation or windiness when the patient evacuates, and sometimes one sees some vers.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	"And there are fistulas that pierce up to the bladder and up to half of the penis; and they reach up to the hip joint and up to the knee."
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula at the fundament, and not transient; and it is that you place your two index fingers on the fundament, and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, then insert a subtle thread of silk or horsehair until you feel the thread with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there comes out no evacuation nor windiness nor worm as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	"And when the fistula is persistent up to the bladder or up to the urinary canal, urine comes out and it cannot be cured by medications."
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If the boil reaches the hip joint, then the inflammation extends to that location. If there's no twisting and the pain radiates around, it will soon burst open, and no medicine nor plaster applied suddenly would help; in such Persians fistulas there is no cure except labor, and vanity of foolish physicians who involve themselves with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In one that is not Persian and is not ancient, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have proven. Thus, the patient lies face down between your hands; they lift their legs up to their thighs and incline their thighs toward their belly. Then insert a tent of brass, or lead if there's twisting, until you know where the inflammation comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around their anus, then you must insert your two index fingers into it. If you sense that it has pierced through, and if between your thumb you feel either the skin or flesh, know that it is Persian. Therefore, do not intervene if it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Some say that one can heal certain conditions well, but this occurs rarely. And the aid given there consists in heating the cautery according to the width of the fistula as it is said before; then insert it hot into the fistula until it reaches near the fundament; and do this twice or thrice until you know that those broken tissues are burnt, resembling a bird's feather; afterwards cure with soft lint moistened in butter until that tissue comes off, then apply ointment gently between skin and flesh.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is healed thus, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it cannot be healed otherwise, and if the tent enters but does not pierce all the way to the fundament which is behind it, and there is a thick covering of flesh or skin between your two fingers and the tent, and you see the fistula through this covering of the heart; then cut from the beginning of the fistula and thrust the tent forward immediately, then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the head of the tent; thus the tent will be released and will fall out; then cleanse those broken tissues resembling a bird's feather, leaving none remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	"And if the pus comes between you and your work, then cauterize it with fire or an acrid medication."
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Because the fire cautery combines two things: namely, burning of adjacent skin and cauterization of blood and moisture; then treat wet wounds with burdock or crushed herbs until the place turns red, and let the burned skin rise in the wound; then dress the wound with dry compresses pressing hard on the hard skin.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	"For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return."
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	"And if a fistula comes out deeply from the anus and is far from the body, put your two fingers into the anus and inquire after it."
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between two there is the cloth or the sinus or skin where it is about to pierce, then apply fire cautery as we have said, or cut until the bottom, or if you can't, put tents and dress as before; but do not cut too deep that you cut the tissue holding the fundament, and let evacuations come without intention. Then dress it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or remove that cover and clean it after cutting near the fundament with a tent or other pointed instrument. Then cleanse the broken skin in the wound as much as possible. Then work to restore the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament: this will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: when you insert the needle into the fistula and it is located on the side of the fundament near the skin above, then take a pierced needle at the tip according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	"And wrap one thread twice around it, and push the needle entirely into the fistula until it reaches the end."
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it passes into the margin of the fundament inside, then draw out the thread from that hole, so that you press your thumb on the fundament; and pull the head of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and tie them to each other tightly, leaving it for one or two days; and tighten occasionally until the threads cut through those tissues that are between them and drop off; then heal the wound until it is closed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	"But if the fistula does not open up on its own, then make an incision in any way that you are able to, if it is not too deeply embedded."
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"For one should not attempt to cut something that is too deeply embedded and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed."
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spinal needle used to open a fistula is sharp and pointed at one end, but not at the other, so that it does not cut where it should not, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	"hemorrhoids"
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: those inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they often ooze blood; some have one, others have several. Those that are outside have a lot of moisture, and sometimes contain a little yellow water or blood, having the color of flesh. The cure for those who have hemorrhoids inside the fundament is to command the patient to strain while walking around in rooms until the fundament lets them out, and then grasp them with forceps or hold them with your thumbnail, then cut them at their base; if the nails cannot hold them due to moisture, take them with a piece of cloth, cotton, or wool, and pull them out with both hands, then cut them and sprinkle warm powders on them that can act as cautery; or cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, and heal them with other cures until they are healthy. If the fundament cannot expel them, cleanse the patient with a biting and sharp purgative to wash what is inside the fundament so that they can come out openly. When the patient strains and if the hemorrhoids have come out of the fundament, then the cure is easy; it is to grasp them with your thumbnail or forceps and cut them, then heal them as we have said until they are healthy, and avoid incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must prepare the stitching in this manner: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle, then draw the thread upwards and have the needle pierce through from the other side; then turn both ends of the thread under the needle and make it loose; tie the thread tightly and remove the needle, do likewise for all others, but leave one to drain excess blood. Then place a moistened cloth dipped in rose oil or cerate on the wound, apply it, and instruct the patient to rest. Leave it until it falls off, then treat it with ointment and other remedies until it heals.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	"Regarding the drying of fistulas in the fundament:"
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	"Many times there is drying out of fistulas in the intestines, either due to natural constriction or when the illness is old and medicinal treatments are ineffective;"
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must scrape off the scab above using a sharp point or your nail so that it does not become moist again. Then heal it as necessary until it is sound; if it cannot be healed, resume scraping more vigorously than before until it heals completely and the scab is removed.
dou fremit	"Regarding tremors:"
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants are a small erroneous appearance before the body, and they go very deep; sometimes you feel them cold, and it feels like death from trembling, and it comes into the whole body, but more so in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	The cure is to take a rod made of an ostrich feather or a strong eagle feather, and place that rod on the trembling, so that its circle envelops the trembling entirely; then turn your hand around the entire rod until you grasp all around the trembling, and press it deep down, grasping the trembling by its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	"And if you see fit to do so, use a feather made of brass or iron in this same manner, making sure it is thin underneath and pointed above;"
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	"Do not pierce too deeply to avoid causing pain and injury; if you wish, cauterize the tremor as is described earlier in the chapter on cautery."
de la forme dou clistere	"Regarding the form of an enema:"
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	"Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or molten bronze or moistened iron; and sometimes these instruments are small or large according to their intended purpose;"
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	"Therefore, those that should be used for treating children and the weak and infirm are small;"
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	"The shape of a small or large enema is as follows, depending on how full the belly is:"
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a disturbance or the belly is tied up, as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and there are two holes on one side and one hole on the other side; and the belly is where you put the medicines in an animal bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and there is one stitch of hemp between each hole, then insert a strong thread made from twisted flax into these holes in the shape of an X or wound around, and gather the belly like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong string beforehand using an instrument, then perform a clyster; this is the form of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	**And let the medicament be neither too hot nor too cold**, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently; then the minister squeezes with both hands until it is completely empty, then remove the clyster, and the patient raises their legs to facilitate discharge; and if the medicament wishes to come out, let it flow as much as possible; and if it remains overnight, it is of greater benefit.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you perform a clyster for an illness of diarrhea of the bowels, and the doctor rushes to remove it, then reapply it until it is clean."
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	**And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament, or an abscess**, then let the clyster be as thin as for a child; and this is the shape of the thin clyster on which the skin should be stretched:
des plaies	"of wounds"
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	"We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about treatments for hands and medicines according to their completion."
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	"I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made from, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from what they are made."
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	**The things by which wounds are made are through stones thrown**, and cuts from sword or knife, or lance or club or arrow, or similar things; or those that are made according to the locations on the body, such as a wound falling on the neck, head, back, belly, liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for their remedy will come later in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is due to a blow from stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the formation of a hot abscess: soak it immediately with cold water from the cephalic vein itself if there is little blood flowing from the wound, and let the soaking be on the opposite side of the injured part; and make the patient abstain from wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to soak it, then let his diet be reduced, and let him not drink wine nor eat meat; and place on the wound, if a hot abscess appears, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in sternutatory wine; and if there is no hot abscess, then apply powder which I will mention later to the wound while it is still fresh with all its blood, and protect it from the air; and if the ars has moved it, then apply some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	"And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut or similar ones, and its lips cannot come together by themselves, then bring them together by stitching, as I will tell you about stomach wounds regarding stitching."
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone and deep, barely attached on one side, cut it off. Then treat the wound with medication and replace tough skin in place of leather, instructing the patient to eat large quantities of meat, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also poultry and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rottenness in the skin and it is not near the bone, cut off all the rotting flesh, then cauterize. And if there is an artery or vein exposed in the wound that cannot be stopped with medicine alone, tie the artery. If this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	"And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: you should put in this powder which seals before air moves it."
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The method of the powder is as follows: Take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live chalk three parts. Grind them finely and fill the wound, pressing firmly so that it adheres well and joins with all its blood. Then bind it tightly, leaving it unbound if it swells; for do not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	"And sometimes this [treatment] is done with quicklime alone when one does not have incense nor dragon's blood, provided that air has not moved the wound."
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved the flesh, especially in summer, do not apply this powder; but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made from barley flour and water and honey, until it softens. Then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine tweezers. And I will tell you later about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	"About wounds to the neck:"
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	"If a wound comes on the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and one on the head, except that if the nerves of the neck or an artery are cut."
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it's the nerves, there is no other remedy but to let nature take its course and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retreat. And do not apply anything cold to the wound, as the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest organ. But let the medicine be warm, such as hot water washed in soft water, mixed with rose oil, and cooked water also washed in soft water, and other mineral stones according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the wound is large, then stitch it up and bind it with bandages, and treat it until it is healed."
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and swollen full of pus, pierce it lower down; and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, drain it, tie it, cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the heart, and the windpipe is guarded through which food passes, then cover the heart over the tube of the neck, and do not touch the neck but place it according to its natural shape; then bind it tightly, leave it for some days, then cure it with drying ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has impressed upon the bone, remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, burn them all if you can, those that you cannot have, leave them until the wound rots, and drain it and ligate the opening; and if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	"And if there are bones and fistulas in the wound, then treat it as I said in its chapter."
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	"About wounds from lances or knives:"
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If the wound is from a lance or knife and it's deep, look to see if any wind escapes from the wound when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal. If it isn't deep but all its blood is fresh, don't apply powder at first nor tie it off so blood doesn't flow into it deeply, reaching the heart and killing the patient; instead, apply attractive ointment and bind it twice a day. And if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out moisture, and make the patient lie on their back for three days or four or more. Then there will be no spasm, nor harmful trembling of the heart, nor straining of breath; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Therefore treat it with plasters and other remedies until it is healed. And if it cannot heal and opens up again, know that there is a fistula there; so treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple, whether on the front or back, then treat it with what's before; if it's large, suture it; and if it's small, use powder. If it's pressed against the bone and has fragmented pieces, probe the wound, and cauterize any exposed vessels if they're severed; but if they're not severed, let the wound fester so that removal will be easier; and judge other wounds on other limbs as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	"On rupture of the abdomen:"
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And the rupture of the abdomen can be large or medium or small. From a large wound, sometimes the intestines or their nerve may protrude, making insertion difficult and suturing more painful. Sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because it's harder to put the intestines back in without sewing them piece by piece. Also know that intestinal rupture occurs in four ways: two common sutures happen in abdominal closure, and two other sutures are common for other body wounds. Still, they are more specific with abdominal closure, which I will detail.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and some part of the intestines has been injured, and it is difficult to reset, this is done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen with cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this way: moisten a sponge or one cloth in boiling water only, or cook in hot water with cinnamon and cumin, and raise the intestines until the swelling has been removed; and sometimes use this restraining wine, and be careful to avoid harming the soul while disentering.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling departing, then moisten the intestines with water in which aloe and mallows have been cooked, for by this the entrance is cleared a little; and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first cure should be such that no one cuts there without great necessity; and this is the instrument for breaking: cut into it in the curve and do not go further; see here its shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines stick out, then carefully place them back according to their natural form in their proper place if you have the power, for this is useful.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is below the belly, then make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is above the belly, put the head and breast higher than the lower parts, and likewise if the rupture of the belly is in one of these two parts, put attention to ensuring that the wounded part is higher than the other.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	If the wounds are small, use what you have available, then take one of your ministers and gently pull out all the ruptured parts with his hand, and join the lips together; and this is the common manner of sewing, and it is that you take one or more needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave two spaces at the head of the wound and insert a needle where there is good strong thread; and pierce both heads of the skin with both heads of the sinew which is beneath the skin inside, until you have pierced it on that part, and join together all four heads of the sinew; then tie them with a double thread around the needle on both sides, then join together both heads of the wound neatly, and then leave two spaces and insert another needle; then bind the thread as you did the first needle, and do not cease doing this according to what you need of needles until all the wound is closed; and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, for fine needles cut through all the flesh, and those too coarse cannot enter well: therefore they must be medium-sized; and do not put the needles too deeply into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before it is sewn up; and then cut off the heads of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient while sleeping, and put tents or bandages on the heads of the needles for useful keeping, and leave them until the wound is healed. And this manner of sewing with needles is more useful in small wounds, for it suffices with one or two needles. The second manner of sewing is common, and it is that you join together both heads of the skin and both heads of the sinew together with one needle where there is a strong medium thread; and when you have pierced these heads all four together, then sew back the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that cloth is sewn; and put between each stitch the thickness of a middle finger.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I reset the intestines for him after he had been ill for 24 hours, and the wound was closed until the 15th day, and I dressed it, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the physicians had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle; and I did not dress it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I put on the wound old cotton twice daily, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways to stitch: Take the needle and insert it from the outer part towards the inner one; when it has pierced through the heart straight on, then lay the head of the needle or the thread where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce through from the inner part towards the outer one. And the purpose of this stitching is to sew like a furrier sews furs, leaving the needle once on one side and picking it up again on the other side until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of sewing, which Galen describes properly, is done thus by some: they bring the two parts together naturally and apply one end of the catgut to the other in this way: insert a needle near the middle of one part and pierce only that spot, leaving both ends of the catgut; then turn the needle and have it pierced from the outer side until it enters on the inner side at the two ends of the catgut; then pierce both through the outer side until they enter on the inner side into two other needles which are placed on the opposite side; and this is the moist manner of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen thus says this word, and some confirm it: one should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread; and one needle must be inserted on one side, and the other on another, in the manner of those who sew hides. Know that when the rupture is inside the belly, the sewing is more difficult than at other places on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is thus: when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the flesh has moved, so put back the intestines and the skin; then place powder made from the flesh nearby, and if the flesh has moved, place some ointment that is present until the wound closes; and stitch the edges together, and let the sinews and muscles be sewn up; then treat the wound like others until it heals. And if you do not have medicines, as soon as it begins to close, put old cotton on it and move it twice a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	But in many cases when the wounds are simple, you have no need of other medicine. And if you doubt that the wound may communicate with the principal members, then it is necessary that you moisten light linen in warm oil of roses or rose oil, and place it around the angles and under the armpits. And if there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which happens often, rinse them with warm red wine, especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestines; and pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines called "jejunum" cannot heal when injured due to the thinness of their walls and the delicacy of the entire body's structure, and their similarity in nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the spleen jumps out of the wound, put it back in immediately like the intestines while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned green or black, then tie off the part that is black so blood does not flow there, for there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ties, and hang the two heads down from below the wound until the spleen falls out to facilitate extraction, and the wound will heal.
de la routure dou boueil	of the bowel's rupture
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people because I saw one man pierced in the abdomen by a lance; the wound was to the right of the stomach, became infected and formed a fistula, from which waste and wind escaped; I treated it as best I could, not ceasing until he was healed, and the place was solid.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him being soldered, I doubted that the patient might have illness in his belly; and there was no harm, but remained in better dispositions, eating and drinking; And some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied in this manner: take frogs with large heads, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the frog has opened its mouth, so place it on the two lips, so that it draws its mouth over; And then cut off its head, and this remains so that it cannot untie itself, then put another frog afterwards in this manner that before, until the wound is entirely closed; And sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And these heads harden in the intestines, and cause no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestines with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that is very lean, and then tie at the head of this thread a thin twisted linen thread, then put the thread through the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in the opening; And this manner of tying with frogthread is not foreign but according to the way of faith and hope; And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is no art or health except subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	"of fistula wherever it may be"
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes open, is universally called "fistula," and similarly when it is channeled and goes back in.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is truly a nodule that is hard and white, where no pain is felt, and it is also channeled like the feathers of a bird; sometimes it flows clear and then becomes thick; sometimes thin, and sometimes sufficient. I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound that does not heal, and there is no flesh, is only so because of one of the eight causes: namely, due to the smallness of blood or flesh; or because it is malicious; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that does not allow flesh to form; or because there is too much bile; or the place is blocked up and the material is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because corruption is a type of pestilence; or because the property in the region is slow in digestion, and health is delayed by nature and inflamed. And I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and the remedies with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	"Now I must tell you about the treatment for fistula that is performed by handiwork."
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or from the face, or from the intestines, or from the bladder, or from some of the ribs, or from the spine of the back, or from any joint of the hands or feet; and also those that come to the main property of the member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are difficult to heal, and there is only work, and ignorance involved; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you recognize it, then take a tent of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, use it to search for it; and if the fistula is crooked, search for it with a subtle tent of lead, for lead bends much around the tortuosity; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot search it well with tents, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for moisture goes from one opening to another and cleanses it; then search for it with bleeding according to what I have said, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and how deep it is, and ask the patient well about the pain they feel at the pressure of your hand, and where they feel it; and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the fracture and the corrupt flesh that is inside; and then heal it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep in a straight place, then you must cut very deep, as far as you can, then put moist tents in hot medicine water, and put them up to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom; and then apply healing ointments, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If you don't feel any pain in the vein or nerve of the main limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, then cleanse until all the decay has been removed, then treat the surrounding flesh until it's clean; and if it isn't clean, and returns to its former state, know that you haven't gone deep enough: uncover further and search until you reach the bottom, remove all the decay, then restore it to its proper place; and if done so, it's well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the decay is too deep to reach; if there's no other option but to leave it to nature. But if there are small rotten bones and you can grasp them with forceps, extract them using appropriate tools. If many bones are affected, remove all of them without leaving any behind. And if moisture hinders you, yet there's no error or fear, cut away the moisture, flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place on the wound something irritating rottenness, and leave it until the place is rotted around the bones, and then they will come out more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, then wait only until all the blackness is gone from it, then restore the wound; and if there is a great part of corruption and it comes up to the flesh of the bone; it must be cut away entirely up to the corruption, and then treated until it is sound; and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was once a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to an inner cause such that matter came into the leg and there was a large abscess which did not have any apparent cause for opening. But foolish physicians operated so much on the abscess that it opened, and they corrupted many materials, and it became a fistula, and there were many holes that all excreted bile and moisture from the body; and many physicians treated him around two years, but none had any skill in the art of hands, until I was called to him, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed through the holes in great quantity. And the skin of the young man became red, and had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, then searched all the holes, and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then hurried, and cut into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and corruption had spread to the bone within; I scraped away what appeared of the rotten bone, and thought there was no other corruption but that which I removed; and began to treat the wound with dry medicines for a long time, but could not heal it; then started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and scraped it away, then removed it, and concentrated on healing the spot; but I could not do so until I cut around about a palm's width of the bone, and drew it out entirely, then filled it with medicines; and it was quickly healed and sewn up, but no longer needed to recommence the work except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, and was of good constitution, causing neither harm nor discomfort at all, neither in breathing nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be done in this way: take a linen cloth and tie it at the head of the exposed bone, and tell someone to hold it up high; then take another thicker linen cloth than the first one, and bind it over the flesh that is above the bone, pulling the rotted flesh downwards and uncovering the flesh on the spot where you wish to see, so that the bone does not wound the flesh; then place a hot iron or a red-hot coal under the bone to move the rotten flesh away; this should be done as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and also again afterwards.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, uncover all the flesh. Then place a branding iron underneath, and then use tweezers to draw the corruption from one side to the other, with the tweezer being as long as the corruption is wide, as we have said. And if the corruption is at the joint, cut off the corrupted joint, and use tweezers on the bone it contains from the other side. And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, there is no other remedy than cutting. And if the corruption is at the wrist of the hand or the wrist of the foot, that is very serious indeed, but nonetheless you must investigate this corruption and how it opens. And cleanse it in every way you can, but without causing harm to veins or nerves. Know also that there are many kinds of knives and tweezers for cutting these bones, according to their size, appearance, thickness, fineness, length, shortness, and hardness; and therefore one must prepare the appropriate tool for each type of operation. And know also that the work will show you which tool you need, according to your knowledge in this art and the evidence of the disease's symptoms.
dou feu	"fire"
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	**The head rots either from within or from without; and when you have treated that decay with medications but they do not help, then you must cover that limb up to the point where the decay begins, so that the patient escapes from death by this means, or from the greater evil of loss of limb. And the sign is that the limb becomes black as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, then that decay spreads limb by limb, and seizes upon the whole body; so act quickly and cover it, and if it is due to the sting of some venomous creatures, such as sea scorpions or vipers and similar ones, then cover the head of the two fingers but do not let any spices come up to the hand.**
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	**And if it comes up to the hand, then cover it at the joint so that the decay does not reach the arm; and if it is in the arm, then cover it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, then it is death, and no external remedies can help unless there is a great quantity of its virtue. And do the same when decay comes to the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cover it after the other joint; and if it reaches the foot, cover the whole foot; and if it moves up into the leg, cover it at the knee joint. And if it goes above the knee, then there is no other remedy than to let the patient die. And the manner of covering or wrapping the limb is thus: you tie it above and below, and stretch out some ministers on one side of the ties downwards, and others on the other side upwards, and you cut away the flesh that is between the two ties with a wide spatula until the bone is uncovered; then cover it with wool, and put a cloth of linen on each side so that the wool does not touch the healthy place and cause the patient another lesion or abscess.**
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs while working, cauterize the spot immediately using some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it's complete, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage and care for it until it heals. And I'll tell you what happened to a certain man: He had a blackening that seemed like burns from fire, starting on his big toe, spreading throughout his foot; when the man saw this corruption, he quickly cut off his foot and was healed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never does an abscess form in the flesh so deep that it collects a great mass of pus; then it becomes round and pierces through, the pus bursts out, leaving the area empty like a vessel; and the skin above is as delicate as a thin veil, not reaching down to the bone or nerve, such illness is called 'sain' and not 'fistula'; but if it stretches so long that it reaches the bone deep inside, then it is called 'fistula'. And the skin is such that you must cut around this skin entirely, even if it is delicate like a thin veil; and it should not be damaged due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you believe that the skin is damaged and corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it thus: observe whether the breast is large and the pus emitted has a foul odor. Then perform a clyster as follows using Egyptian medicine made like this: take aloe, oil, and litharge in equal amounts, cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine becomes red and thick like honey; then take some of this according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and administer it via the breast, closing the opening. Leave the medicine there for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; repeat this many times until the breast is cleansed and freed from foulness. Sometimes use a clyster of ash water when Egyptian medicine is not available. Take vine ashes, add water to them, let them soak, and administer them via the breast until you are sure that the breast is well cleaned. If the patient cannot tolerate it, or neither Egyptian medicine nor ash water helps, then perform a clyster with water and honey mixed with a little powdered litharge, or use a mixture of honey and wine which has properties to cleanse and wash, making the wound scar harder. Once this is done and you are confident that the breast is well cleansed, perform a clyster with medicine that produces flesh. Take diachylon plaster and cook it with rose oil and wine. If the opening of the breast is small and the clyster tube cannot enter, then widen it slightly using an iron tool and insert a wick of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened. If the wound is too large, then stitch it up leaving only one spot where the clyster can be inserted; if the opening that emits pus is above, then cut lower down where it is located.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the bowel is deep, let no flesh grow into it; and if you cannot cover the wound from below as you see fit, prepare it in such a way that the bowel moves to its lowest point. For when the bowel is deep, let no flesh grow into it, and if you cannot cover the wound from below as you see fit, prepare it in this manner: let the bowel move easily downward, leaving nothing of it; and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and stretch them over the linen cloth that covers all the wound. Then cut forcefully around the opening of the wound a little wider than the first one. Then gently apply ointment onto another cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it on the wound to support the bowel, without removing the large outer cloth afterwards; but often remove the one on the wound to remove the bowel, and know what comes out of the bowel - whether it's poisonous liquid or a little or enough, or digested or undigested. And beware if the patient feels pain or numbness, and if there is an abscess or not. When your medicine has been applied in this manner and you see how it acts on the opening of the wound, know that the breast is already healthy, and the wound is approaching healing; then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other cloth and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast becomes bow-shaped after many days, know that the breast is not healthy.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons have long lingered, do not despair of health, for recovery approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people whose wounds take a long time to heal, and others who recover quickly; if undigested food jumps from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach has not emptied itself; and if the stomach takes a long time to empty and is far away, apply dry medicines of moist substance and dry virtue, such as diachylon ointment, for it contains much vitriol, which is the last medicine; take diachylon ointment and make it with rose oil and equal parts old wine; then cook and use it; and this same thing is done better when cooked with honey, if diachylon ointment is not present, or you can take mirrh, aloe, and frankincense, grind them, and mix the powder with the honey while it's on the fire; then spread it on a cloth and place it on the stomach, sometimes administering long pepper and celestine root, which is also called violet flour and centory; use simples or compounds: grind them, make them into powder, mix them with the aforementioned honey, and use it; if the cure is prolonged and not cured by this cure, know that the corruption has gone deep and affected the bone, hard members, or ligaments; then proceed with the cure for fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	To treat a boil on the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panaritis is an abscess that arises under the nail of the little finger of the hand or foot, or sometimes appears on other toes; and when it becomes elderly and no care is taken for it, then comes the thick abscess, running and breaking out so much that it runs to the root of the nail, and sometimes runs over the whole thing; and the corrosion comes down to the bone, until there comes a foul pain, and the head of the toe becomes large, and the color becomes dark.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If you treat it as we have said in the division and the treatment does not help at all, then you must cut away with iron the entire excess that remains of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is very helpful if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy. But if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to prick, and starts to fester, then you must place a hot iron under the nail where it pricks the flesh, lift it up, cut away that subtle and tender flesh carefully and gently, and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove all; then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out, and remove the rotten part, for as long as the rotted bone remains there, it cannot heal; and if you see both are corrupted, cut one in front as was previously mentioned, then treat it until it is healed; and if it is inflamed and painful, you must first ease it; then cut the nail of the spina bifida diagonally from above, and ensure that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel great pain. And if this happens, place something on it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain in the wrist
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Of the two joints that sometimes appear in some men by chance, one may be entirely fleshy, and another may have bones, and there may be a nail, and some are born at the root of the joint, where their birth is between certain toes.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born with any knot on the neck does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the neck sometimes moves; the measurement of one who is plump is light, cut it off from its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: you must take care of this.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one born with a knot on the back of the neck, first cut around the flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable knife, and then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	A dislocation that occurs at both knees simultaneously comes from birth, or from a wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar causes.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary to cut that adhesion so that the neck returns to its natural shape, then place between two wet compresses or cloths soaked in rose oil to prevent them from sticking together; or place between two thin pieces of lead until the joint is healed as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a dislocation occurs at one of his knees with the palm of the hand, cut this dislocated joint in the manner that is appropriate.
des vils	Of the lowly
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The veins are large winding tubes filled with melancholic superfluities that come from various parts of the body, and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer to him a purge of bile, and then heal it with basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cautery of fire is done in two ways: one is to cut them and draw off the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is done in this manner: first heat the leg with hot water very strongly until the large blood is subtilized. Then hold the leg of the patient from above the hip down to below the knee joint; then cut the vein in one place or two or three, with a wide cut. Then squeeze and draw out black blood by hand from one end to the other, as much as the virtue of the patient can suffer. Then tie it up, and tell him to bathe his wounds with cold water for several days afterwards. Repeat evacuation and cleaning when veins are full, which harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The raising of the veins is done in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, especially if there is a lot of hair. Then put it in warm water or heat it by the fire until the veins swell up and become red. Cut into the vein on the long side of the knee joint or below the ankle joint. Then open the skin with an awl and scrape off the vein from each side until it is visible when touched. You will see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord. Then put the hook underneath, raising the vein from the skin. Then sew it to another awl gently. Cut again three fingers above the first cut. Then scrape off the skin over the vein until it is visible. Then raise it with the hook as before and sew it to another awl. Then make another cut if necessary, then lift it up and cut at the end of the foot. Then draw it out and remove it cut by cut until it is all out. If you cannot draw it out, take a strong double-thread needle and thread it through and tie it off. Then put it underneath the hook and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out. Make sure it doesn't break, as if it breaks you won't be able to draw it out or remove it, causing harm to the patient. When you have finished, place damp wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil on the wound and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the sinew is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cut it through; and pull it as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron tool used to cut the sinew is curved, and it does not cut through, so that it does not cut into the vein; and it should be thickly curved, for if it were thin, it would cut into the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the common vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is inserted into the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and on dry land without moisture; but sometimes it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to rot that comes underneath the skin, like the serpent entering and winding between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a very great inflammation comes into the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to protrude forth, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the head opens, you must wrap around it a piece of cloth from two and a half to two spans long, and knot it, letting the cloth hang down on the leg. And every time it leaks at the front, wrap the cloth around it again and knot it. If it is too long, cut off part of it, wrap the remainder, but do not cut it off at its root, for if you do so, it will retreat into the flesh and cause an abscess and corruption in that place, resulting in bad illness. Therefore, it must be treated bit by bit up to the head, leaving nothing on the body; sometimes this vein is when it has been treated five or ten palms long, and once a man came to me whose was ten palms long. When you cut it, put one ray into the hole and pierce it all the way through so that everything comes out. Empty the matter that is inside, and bring healing medicines to apply there against corruption for some days, then treat it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Sometimes this vein is more humid, especially when it opens at the ankle joint or foot, where there are many pores and blood flows out abundantly; treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	The worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land 'cattle sickness,' because it often occurs in oxen. It is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, traveling throughout the body both ascending and descending, causing pain as it moves from limb to limb. When it rubs against the skin, it causes sores. It arises from putrefaction of certain humors, like those that cause worms, serpents, and other parasites in the belly. Its malice is doubted because when it travels through the body, it can reach the head and enter the eye, causing it to become inflamed and destroyed.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and drawn out, one cannot be sure that it is all out until it moves: therefore, tie the area above and below with a strong, tight bandage. Then make an incision and draw it out, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and not found, cauterize with fire until it dies. The greatest harm it causes is running through the eye, as we have said; but if you see it coming near the head towards the eye, press down hard on the eyebrow below it, then make an incision and draw it out. The patient should use bodily purifications and solvents for bad humors, avoiding foods that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From pain caused by windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called in our land "wakirir," and it is a pain that comes into certain limbs, and moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and soon after, I saw it move just like a worm to the shoulder, more quickly than anything, like quicksilver when it moves from one place to another; the pain departed from that spot, and fixed itself in the shoulder, and then a little while later it spread throughout her body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that it would often turn around her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	"I marveled greatly how it moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness in this manner before."
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had heard many times that pain could move from one place to another, but I had never seen it as clearly as in this woman's case; and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body and uncovered veins, which made this windiness more apparent; and it does not appear according to this reason in those who are dislocated, who have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to heal this illness, and the patient feels that pain which we have spoken of, then lay it on quickly above and below, and then cut until that constrained wind escapes from its place; cauterize the area; and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat those that relieve winds, like fetid pills and pills of serpentine, and similar others.
des saiettes	And arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	"Sweats are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the parts of the body where they flow."
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is such that there are some with large points and small ones, and barbed and welded; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with splinters; and those which fall into any limb fall in two ways: either into the principal member, like brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidney, bladder, intestines, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls therefore into any place of these members and the signs of death which I shall tell you below appear: then you should beware of extracting this arrow, for many die afterwards; and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of an arrowhead when it strikes and pierces the bone, and the eye socket above the brow jumps, is when there is darkness, swelling, redness, and inflammation in the eyes, and redness and swelling of the tongue, and spasm and disturbance of consciousness, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes there may be blood from the nostrils or ears; and sometimes it loses speech and voice; and from the wound flows white moisture like feathers, and also burning of flesh; and if these signs appear to you, then take care of the cure, and remove the arrowhead if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	And the sign of an arrow striking the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and sometimes the arrow moves like a feather, and black blood flows out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: then know without doubt that death has occurred.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	"And the signs of sweat that affects the lung are: foam flows from the wound without pain, the throat swells, the patient changes color and sighs loudly while seeking cold air."
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	"And if sweat flows onto the covering of the lung, near the little ribs; there will be great pain and distress with sighing; and all the members of the shoulders move."
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	"And if sweat flows onto the stomach, perhaps some undigested food will flow from the wound."
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	"And if sweat flows onto the belly and much feces flows out through the intestines, there is no hope for recovery or removal of the sweat."
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	"And if sweat flows into the bladder and urine flows out with fever, and the patient feels strong pain, know that the wound is deadly."
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	"Other members such as the face and neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary muscles, spine of the back, buttocks, thighs and legs, and similar members are safe according to many different conditions."
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	"When sweat is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you happened to me so that you can do likewise."
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened that an arrow fell into the ear of one man at the root of the nose: I tried it and pulled it out on the other side beneath the fat of the ear, and it was removed without damage.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I pulled out an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye beneath the skin, and the arrow was reversed, so that only its tip could be reached facing the wood, and it was as large as a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears; the eye remained healthy, and no ill happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I pulled an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabian arrow with ears; I cut the barbs and slowly pulled it out until I removed it, and the Christian remained healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I pulled an arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly, and thought he would die; but after 30 days had passed, his condition did not change. I cut upon the arrow, engaged it, and pulled it out forcibly, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to treat a man on whom an arrow has fallen onto the back and the wound became solidified over it; and the arrow remained inside him and did not change its natural position nor caused harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you wish to treat another man on whom an arrow has fallen onto his face and the wound became solidified; and he remained thus without suffering great pain; and many others similarly.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And an arrow was pulled out from the man of the king's princes who had fallen into his nostril, which was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was entirely embedded when I was called for treatment three days after it had fallen.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I felt all around with a subtle probe and did not find it; but he felt pain and discomfort beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was due to the tip of the arrow. I applied a plaster with atractive and digestive ointment so that the area would not swell; and then I saw where the arrowhead was.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I placed my hand on the wound for five days and reopened it again. The patient remained like this for a long time until he felt the arrowhead move one day within his flesh; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed corrosive medicine on the wound for many days until it opened. I tested it and felt the tip of the arrowhead moving in its place; then I applied more of this medicine to the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow was visibly exposed. Four months passed, and then the wound healed over so much that when I tried to remove the arrow with pliers, I could not pull it out. Therefore, I continued to experiment and devise various tools until I successfully removed it with well-made pliers, as described at the end of this chapter, after one day of effort.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I restored it nonetheless; the wound was healed, and the patient was completely healthy.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But I told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you can put your treatment on what I did not say, because books cannot encompass everything. However, wise masters compare even small things and find new works and instruments based on what is present or lacking in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows come out of the members they are stuck in according to two ways: either through the point where they entered or through another part. The one that exits through the point it entered is an arrow entering into flesh, and sometimes it exits without causing damage.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out immediately, let it be until the flesh around it is ripe and the opening is cleared. And similarly, if it is stuck in bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for a few days and move it each day. Then it will come out; if not, carefully incise all around it with a fine knife until the surrounding area is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the bone of the head and reaches one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned become apparent to the patient: then do not pull it out, but let it remain there for a few days until it becomes level. For if the arrowhead reaches so far, death is near.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrowhead is stuck only in the bone and does not reach so far, and the patient remains for some days without bad accidents, then prepare to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the arrowhead is very deeply stuck and cannot come out; then apply caustics around it as I told you; then treat the spot until it heals."
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrowhead is lodged in its place in the body so that it cannot be seen, then search for it carefully. And if you feel it, then pull it out with some convenient instrument. And if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead, and there are no bone, nerve, or vein involved, then cut until the wound is large enough. And pull out the arrowhead if you can, and if there are ears on it where it holds fast, then remove the flesh that is stuck in it by both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrowhead so that you can pull it out; and be careful not to break the arrowhead while pulling it, for then it would cause greater injury.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	"And if you cannot draw it out at once, let it stay until the flesh around is corrupted; then draw it out, for extraction will be easier."
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood opposes you, then follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of the incision on the nerve and the vein, and find a way how you can move to pull out the arrow without danger, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form that he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	If the arrow comes from another side, where some part of it is apparent, or if the skin is swollen at that spot so that one sees or feels it around: then cut there until tongs can grip it, and then pull it out. If it is stuck now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	"And if the arrowhead is held in bone, turn your hand around until it enters the bone and widen the hole; then draw it out."
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then resume the extraction until it comes out. And if the wood of the arrow is there, throw the whole wood away; and if the shaft has fallen and you see that pushing will help, then use a crowbar so that the point of the arrow enters into the notch of the tool; and then push it out, and if the arrow has been split, then push the tool with its pointed end inwards to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrowhead is touched, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as it should.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrowhead falls in the buttock or belly or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can cut on it, then cut there; but guard against cutting the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch the wound if necessary; and treat until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used for extraction is like a bird's beak, and here it is depicted:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the stone.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the butt-end of the arrowhead is also like the feather of a bird, for pushing into the tip of the arrow, as here is its shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the forceps for inserting and extracting is shown here
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins from which blood is let for healing purposes, sixteen of which are on the head, namely: two temporal arteries behind the ears, called 'double herbes'; and two arteries that appear in both temples; and two veins in both eye sockets, called 'aspirers'; and one vein in the forehead; and one vein at the top of the nose; and two jugular veins in the neck; and two veins above the lips of the mouth, which are those veins called 'augulherich'.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins commonly used are two in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and laypeople call it "the vein of the head"; and the mean one is called "fast", and it consists of the cephalic and the basilica, and laypeople call it "the vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side, and laypeople call it "the vein of the belly", and it is over the fossa, and this is the one that is used, which opens clearly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the savatella is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is beneath the curvature of the pouch on the left side, and the second is the saphenous vein which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "the nose" that is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The veins that are behind the ears help with catarrh and migraine. The benefit of cupping, as I told you before, is that you should raise the patient's head and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth. Then have the patient press their neck with their fist until two veins appear behind the ears in two places on the top of the head. Grasp them between your thumb and index finger, where you feel the pulse below your fingers, and squeeze gently. Then take the lancet and insert it under the vein up to the bone. Next, raise your hand along the vein above until you cut through both layers of skin and vein completely, making two fingers' width, and let out as much blood as you see fit. Then press and bind it so that it is well drained; I have already spoken about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The benefits of cupping two arteries located on the temples include treating headaches, colds, and chronic eye conditions, as well as removing water from the eyes. Here is how to do it: Have the patient press their neck until both veins appear clearly; feel the pulse beneath your fingers and squeeze gently. Then lift your heart above the vein with your index finger and insert the lancet underneath, lifting the vein up and cutting it like you did with the other two veins. Let out blood according to what is necessary. Then release the patient and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, followed by cotton. Finally, bind it tightly and leave it until it is well drained. We have already spoken about their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bloodletting from the frontal vein is as beneficial for old facial diseases and headaches and redness; and its qualities are such that the patient strains their neck in twisting, until the veins appear; then take the instrument called "fosseur", of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein and strike with your hand or something else, allowing blood to flow according to the amount you desire; then loosen the patient's neck and bind the vein until it is sealed with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	"Nevertheless, the bandages should not be too tight, and tie them diagonally because the bone is close by, and sometimes the bandage breaks when it's thin."
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The benefit of the two veins that are in the temples is for the eyes and their diseases, redness, inflammation of the eyelids, and facial diseases; and the qualities of their bleeding are such that the patient strains their neck by turning it, as before; then bleed them, and let the blood be drawn horizontally, a bit long, a bit wide, because there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	"And if the bandage is thin, it might break. Then wipe away the blood until you have enough, and then tie on cotton, tying it securely."
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bloodletting of the vein of the nose is beneficial for ague, and frenzy, and facial illnesses, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, especially when it is chronic; and the qualities of the bloodletting are that the patient strains their neck, then presses their nose with your left hand, and takes a long, fine lancet, and inserts it into the lip on the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow; do not go too deep in, and let the blood flow according to your need, then leave it overnight, for it is quickly restored; this is the form of the lancet
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bloodletting of the two veins helps with the narrowing of the anus, and the onset of measles, and many illnesses, and ringworm, and gangrene, and herpes, and esthiomenitis; and the qualities of the bloodletting are that the patient strains their neck downwards on both sides, as we have said; and let the master be standing above the patient's head, and the patient sit on one seat, then make a wide cut in the long vein, then draw temperately some blood, or as much as necessary; then do the same on the other vein, then untie the bandage, and press both veins moderately so that the patient does not faint. Let it until morning, until the wound is healed
de la sainie des leivres	Concerning the care of the eyes.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	"The bandaging of the veins above the lips helps with colds in the mouth, gum corrosion, cracked lips, and around the nose."
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the method of eye care is to have the patient sit before you and hold their neck steady as I've said; then turn your hand, and look at the two veins, one on the right eyelid and one on the left, which are recognized by being black, and having small black veins around them: therefore cut both, and if you don't recognize them or are uncertain, then cut the larger of each side, and do likewise for the two veins above and below, as it's the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Concerning the treatment beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The treatment of the veins beneath the tongue aids after the treatment of the facial vein, and is used for narrowing of the throat, and diseases of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth; and the method of the treatise is that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, lifts their tongue, and looks beneath each side for a black vein: therefore cut both, but do not go too deep, as arteries lie beneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	Veins of the head are commonly opened in two ways: either with a wide-bladed lancet or with an olive-shaped one like a cutting edge, and these are called "anesils"; they are wide and slender according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	"The shape of the mirror bandage is very well-known and is wide as you can see:"
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	It is necessary for opening hairy veins full of thick, visible blood that contain thick and turbid blood; this is the shape of the olive blade.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	"It's more pointed and thin, used for bandaging small veins with clear yellow blood."
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps those suffering from ailments below the throat, neck, face, and belly. The cutter must cut deeply and beware of the artery beneath it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery and blood flows profusely, he must stop it as I said before; the blade should not be pricking but cutting like an 'anesil'.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilisk does not open manifestly, then you must remove it and replace it with another one; or if you want any vein from it, or if you want to sew in place of it the vein inside the arm: it opens manifestly; and heat the blade on anvil with annealing fire, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see that you can recognize the place of the vein, then before removing the arm, touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with ink, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with fire-annealed blade; but be careful not to hit the artery when you see the place swell, for that is the artery: avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see something like urine from a child coming out above, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery: quickly then, put your finger on it steadily, then remove your finger when the bleeding stops, which often happens; then tie the arm, and leave it thus, and do not let the patient move it; and be careful, and do not let him move until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	"If the bleeding doesn't stop and you're alone without a doctor nearby, tie the artery if it's visible because its head retracts. Then compress the bleeding."
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of fig bark, and cut it open, then take one half and tie it securely until the next day; if bleeding stops, that's good. If not, treat it as we have said with powders that stop bleeding; these treatments are not harmful in many cases due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's bond.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The bandage for the vein in midsection helps draw blood from above the head and below the body because it is composed of basil and celandine as we have said. The surgeon should be careful about the nerve beneath, and if he probes too deeply, he may inflame the nerve and injure it, which could prevent healing. This nerve often surfaces, but in some men it does not due to its thinness, so you must heal it with the instrument anesil; and avoid damaging the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The bleeding of the cephalic vein helps, as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; and it is necessary to bleed with the olive-shaped flame or the myrtle-shaped flame, for this is the safest of all veins, as there are neither nerves nor arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, it is necessary to search for the lightest location, and if one misses the mark the first time, they should try again; sometimes the location becomes swollen in some people when one misses the mark the first time, but this causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of cauterization depends on your skill.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is performed not only for the sake of maintaining health but also to prevent future illnesses; and bloodletting should be done in one of the three veins located on the head: namely, the cephalic, temporal, and basilica veins. Bloodletting should be done at the beginning of Lent before dinner, and in autumn and winter after meals when signs ofpletion appear. Bloodletting should take place on the first or third day, two to three hours after noon.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The ointment administered to the sick has no fixed time limit. Instead, it is used when needed throughout the day and at all times. It is not necessary to anoint children until they are fourteen years old, nor women who are pregnant for less than four months or more than seven.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Old people who have passed the age of sixty should not be cauterized.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When someone wants to be anointed in any manner, they must first cleanse their intestines with a light enema if there is much retained feces. This ensures that the veins do not draw harmful impurities from the intestines into the main limbs. Avoid anointing those who are too salty from eating meat, or who are drunk, regardless of how much they have consumed; also avoid those who are dropsical, and those recovering from a recent colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, menstruation, hard labor, sleeplessness, fasting, or anyone lacking vital force due to injury or illness. Then refine the humors with foods, drinks, and medicines if you can, as long as there is no impediment preventing it; then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood. Anoint around the third vein of the chest, as we have described earlier in this text. That day, avoid hard work, excessive eating or drinking, sexual activity, and similar behaviors. Be cheerful and happy, with the anointing one standing taller than the one being anointed. Rub the arms twice or thrice, then gently press the ligature above the middle to ensure it is not too tight or loose, as this can hinder blood flow. Then moisten the cloth with a little old oil, place your left thumb on the vein below where you wish to anoint, ensuring the vein is neither too full nor empty before pressing firmly with the ferrule.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flow like strings in the leg, and some such that are full of windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it retreats from the flame and cannot open the vein; and thus there are many; and if he opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, therefore the surgeon must be careful in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If the vein opens on the first attempt, that is good. If not, try again a little lower or higher, but avoid inflamed areas.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the wound is swollen and the patient fears it, let him rest for one or two days without tying the arm; perhaps pustules may come out; do not enter into a bath, then resume washing if it pleases him; and if the hole is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not flow enough blood as you see, then apply fire to that hole itself with all the flame directly; and work a little hastily before the wound swells; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swollen, do not recommence the cautery, and put some oil ointment on it, for it lightens the body's blood, and in this place the oil's ointment is beneficial. And similarly administer oil ointment in every venesection that you perform on veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same thing is done with troacle and bowels of euphorbium when it is put on the place; thus it subtilizes the blood and scatters when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess appears there, which happens often, especially when the vein is not cut deep enough that time, then hasten and apply a sponge soaked in warm water and salt to the place, and keep it there for an hour. And you must do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if some blackness or greenness remains at the place afterwards for some days, do not worry about it; and if you see it, apply some mixture of aloes or myrrh mixed in juice of calamint, mastich, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an boil appears during the bleeding of the basilica vein; then place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft under pressure from your hand, that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not apply anything we have mentioned, for fear of causing an artery to burst; but instead make a dry plaster with one egg and harden the area, then cauterize it with another cautery until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And let each person bleed according to the strength of their constitution and the color of their blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if it is thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for the full and strong person who needs bloodletting to make a larger wound, and let the flame be wide; but for the weak one, do the opposite, and they should be pricked often with a thin needle, and this should be done by cutting across, not piercing; and this method of bleeding prevents loss of blood and damage to nerves, and is better than long or wide pricking.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body is weak from bleeding, give him softened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is overheated, then bleed him three or four times; and if he has a cold constitution, let him eat before the bloodletting softened bread in mulled syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during bloodletting, after losing much blood, then he should smell broth of meat, and subtle fragrant syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to vent his arm and bleed again later on, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bleed little by little according to his remaining strength continually.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to vent their arm after the first bleeding and has a strong body, should bleed again seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to wash themselves elsewhere should do so on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Because there is much blood inside the body that is already heated and causes fever; therefore, it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and widen the wound opening until it weeps freely. Then, when you have washed all conditions of healing, place your hand on the swollen area as it heals, ensuring the patient does not move from the wound opening, which happens often if the healer is negligent; but it is not necessary to do this when you see that you need to untie the bandages and let blood flow again the second time. If the wound is curved, straighten the arm quickly, for this would be bad. Instead, leave it until it bleeds a second time. Or, you can touch with the tip of the flame so that the frozen blood at the wound opening may come out, then place a cloth soaked in cold water on it and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has fled, then leave it alone and do not squeeze it too tightly until the boil is healed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it becomes necessary to draw blood a second time, then wash him in the same spot or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein within the arm can be washed instead of the vein in the head because it is composed similarly.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of healing is thus: the patient puts his hand in warm water until the blood vessels become red. Then it should be bound moderately so that the wound appears well, and now heal it across, not wide or long; make the opening large and heal close to the joint of the hand. If blood cannot come out, put the hand back in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough. But if it is summer, do not put the hand back in warm water, for this is done more often in winter than in summer. The healing of this vein is safer than all others, as there are no arteries or nerves present.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve for the healing of the right hand is beneficial for all ailments of the liver, and this is its method: constrain the hand, and place it in hot water until the vein becomes swollen, so that one can see it; and if the salve runs sideways, and if you cut it entirely along its length, nothing will harm; and do not go too deep with it, for nerves lie underneath all bare of flesh; then return the hand to hot water, so that blood does not freeze in the wound and cannot escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn as much blood as necessary, then place oil and linen on the vein to bind it quickly, and do this for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The washing of the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mice (gout), and do everything as I have told you concerning the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the Sophene is beneficial for all illnesses that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of flowers [flux], and illness of the loins, and of the old thighs and legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its salve are such that the sick person places their foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it breaks, and binds above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and many loins go through there above the foot; therefore anoint there where the largest loin passes, or at the ankle, which is more beneficial.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you wash it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and cut across it as in cutting, and make the wound shallow.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if blood cannot flow out, then immerse the foot again in water and let the vein empty well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the ligature fails the first time, then recommence the second above a bit, for the place is salted; do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and thus do likewise to the sinew of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The place of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle, and its washing is beneficial for pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the ligature's quality is such that the patient enters or leaves the bath, and stretches above the ankle four fingers in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then tie the ligature in all ways that you can, and crosswise; and it is better that you cut it, for the place is dry, and it is very prone to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then tie any vein of the leg that opens towards the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and make the blood flow as much as you see, and then untie the ligature, and put cotton on and bind it tightly; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Regarding cupping.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or earthenware, or glass. Cupping is performed in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping that is done without injury is of two kinds: either it is performed with fire or without fire. Cupping done by striking and bloodletting is performed in fourteen places on the body, one of which is at the top of the head; another in the neck; two others on both sides of the neck; one under the chin; two on the shoulders; one on each hip; two on the arms; two on the legs; and two on the ankles. Cupping does not involve drawing blood except from small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken at all, unlike cupping done on veins. It should not be administered with or without fire in any case ofpletion where the entire body needs to be emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary to perform cupping due to illness or custom, we will administer it at the beginning or end of each month and also at every opportunity. For there are those who, when they need cupping, have a heavy head; others findpletion and redness in their face, head, neck, and darkness before their eyes; some see blood drops in their mouth, have an swollen tongue, and spit blood; and still others dream of seeing bloody and wounded people, the dead, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially during the month, we order cupping to be performed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The sneezing of the mouse aids the heat that comes to the eyes, and it should not be done after evacuation of the entire body; this ventilation replaces the sneeze of the cephalic, and one who is cold-natured or has catarrh should not use it, for it does them great harm. Old men nor those with cold maladies on their head should also not use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	"And those who are often cured by it become accustomed to it, and therefore the cupping glass should be placed a little lower down out of fear of becoming accustomed."
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Ventilation in the neck replaces sneezing from the head and basilica. It is beneficial for the narrowing of the breast, splitting the channel of the lung, coughs, and repletion. However, it should be done gently, as too much pressure can cause imbalance to the stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Ventilation at the second ribs of the neck is good for headaches, ophthalmia, migraines, strangulation, and pain in the roots of teeth. It replaces sneezing from the basilica; you should instruct the patient to express their hand on putting it, so they do not block the artery or cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	"Winds beneath the chin are beneficial for mouth diseases, gum decay, and similar ailments that affect the mouth; they are located at the level of the two lips."
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	"Winds on the shoulders are beneficial for diseases caused by heat and excess."
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventsation of the ribs is equivalent to that of three veins in the arm, as it attracts blood from these large veins; and instruct the surgeon not to go too deep with his iron, for the place is bare of flesh, and full of nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	"The cupping glass placed on the buttock is beneficial for hemorrhoids of the fundament and for diseases below. The cupping glass must be large and made of earthenware so that it may draw well; otherwise, if it were too delicate, it would break and cause great wounds."
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	"The cupping glasses on the legs draw clearly because they attract blood from the whole body and are beneficial for old back pains, sciatica, bladder pain, and they strengthen the joints. They are located at the level of the two sophenes and the two ankles. However, prolonged use can weaken the body and cause swelling in certain dispositions."
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	"The method of applying the cupping glass is to first place it empty and suc
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	"And if the blood is thick, one must strike twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood."
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	"And if the blood is very thick, one must strike a third time. And when we wish to draw only a little blood at a time, it suffices to strike once."
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we wish for much blood, let us recommence often; and if the blood is thick, go deep with your iron, until the point pierces suddenly; and it is fitting for those who have thick and hard skin, and narrow pores, that you anoint the places of the ventsouses with aperitive and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucurbita seed oil; and if it is in winter, with cress oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	"And if the superfluities are thick and cold, take almond oil, or balm oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones."
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one whose skin is tender and has wide pores is being treated, no oil should be placed there, but it should be washed after the ventsation with rosewater, or cold water, or morel water, or cucurbita water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	"And those who have too much moisture, they should rise from this with oil of sage, or myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar things."
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have abundant excesses should rise from old wine, or water of mustard, or decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar ones; and one should not bleed before the bath nor during it, but afterwards an hour or two; and one should not sleep after bleeding, and they must warm themselves when they are about to be bled and when they are being bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware if one who has bled is choleric, and if the blood is too thick and inflamed; then they should take cold things such as pomegranates and endive and lettuce with garlic, and similar things; and eat figs, and castrated ram meat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with cold complexion should take honey syrup, and medium fragrant wine which is between old and new, and eat peaches, figs, and small birds and chickens; and on the day they are to be bled, they should drink more than eat; and sometimes one must give treacle or muscat to certain men before or after bleeding, to strengthen the main limbs; but let the blood be subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Ventouses placed without piercing are those applied to the liver, womb, foot, belly, mouth, back, and hip. These areas cannot withstand piercing, and such use is only for drawing blood from one member to another, as when we apply them to the breasts during milk fever. They remove viscosity from members by applying ventouses to the belly and mouth to reduce swelling. They alleviate pain where there is obstruction or stone by attracting it through their absorptive power, perhaps removing an obstruction or dislodging a stone from its place. Similarly, they are used when there is retained wind in the liver or womb. These ventouses are administered empty for suction alone; sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in cases of pleurisy. In this manner, one fills the ventouse with hot water or water in which appropriate herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	"The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:"
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And let there be two of them with a width of half a palm's breadth and a depth of two palms, and on each side around the middle, there should be one small hole like for inserting a needle; let it be made of brass, softened beforehand so that it does not cut the patient when placed on the limb. And in the middle, there should be a transverse rod of brass or iron to hold an inserted candle, and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who use them; for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of old people, and those of the thin are different from those of the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must place this cupping glass on the limb in such a way: insert the candle of wax or flax into it and place it across the rod that is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass and does not burn the patient. Then place it on the limb, making sure that both holes are aligned as we have mentioned earlier, so that when desired, steam can escape through them, and remove the cupping glass; then take out the flax cloth as before and repeat this process often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping procedure used for treating pleurisy, which is acute, there is no tube or opening, and it is not filled with fire except when full of air, and it is placed only on the member; and that is its shape.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without fire are those cupping procedures used only in members where one cannot place cups due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in places devoid of flesh, such as the two eyes and others like them. And the qualities of using these are that when you find leeches that are in clear, sweet water without any injury, then take them; and place them in a vessel of sweet water until they become famished and have nothing in their bellies. Then have the vein and cupping prepared, then rub the member until it becomes red, and place the leeches on it. And when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where one can put a cup, then put it there, for this is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then raise the wound with egg yolk, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the wound bleeds too much afterwards onto the body of the wounded, then moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on until the bleeding stops; and if the blood is multiplied, then place powdered vitriol or gum, etc., until it stops; or you may put half a handful of peeled fava beans on the wound, and leave them there until they adhere to the wound, now it will stop; and if you need more, take others.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the blood vessels do not wish to clot, then rub the wound with fresh blood or insert a needle into it until some blood flows out, and then place them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere; and when you see that they are falling off, powder some alum and barley flour or ash onto them, now they will stick.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	"Here begins the book of fractures"
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	"This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a remedy for fracture and dislocation."
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that foolish physicians cast themselves aside from this chapter, having never seen any of the ancient books nor read a letter of them; and therefore the science in our land is estranged, for I found never any good one; and know nothing thereof, but by the science of the ancient books, wherein I have studied so much that I have treated the science therein, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have plainly described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have abridged it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are arranged.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	"Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book that those who seek understanding and remain faithful to the truth should study these pages and chapters so that those who are experienced may learn and teach this noble art to others."
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when breaking or dislocation or torsion or contusion occurs in anyone, if any thing hinders you altogether, such as weakness of body, or child, or old man; or if the time is not very hot, nor too cold; and avoid cold things, namely cold drinks, and flesh of poultry and venison, and drink no wine, neither eat fat meats, nor fill yourself too full with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you are in doubt of a hot aposteme, nor of an expansion of matter to the limb. Let the patient return to his former government which he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	"And when the broken bone begins to unite, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with foods that promote growth and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, and red wine, and similar things."
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	"For by such nourishment the bones are strengthened and the fracture heals more quickly."
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of the elderly and decrepit cannot be well reset or mended according to their nature due to stiffness of the limbs, nor those that are too soft, like the bones of young children; but take care, align on the broken bone two large splints which join together and hold the limb in place until it heals properly; do not cut off any part of its work, and therefore it should be nourished with wholesome foods.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	"And know that fractures are diverse and manifold in many ways."
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	"For a fracture of the head is different from one of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the various types of fractures."
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	"For there are fractures that occur suddenly, like those caused by a fall or blow, such as cutting a feather in half with scissors."
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	"And some fractures come with wounds while others have only a small crack."
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each manner has its own device and proper tool in the restoration, according to what the memory brings back into its place; and the breakage of the bone is known by the twist being there, clearly apparent by touch, and audible when pressed with the hand; but if there is no twisting or sound upon touching, and the patient feels no great pain, then there is no breakage. But it can still have a twist, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	"So do not move the limb yourself but apply the medicines mentioned below and then gently immobilize it with bandages."
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fractures which go into the air, and are in two parts dislocated, it is necessary to set them evenly at the point before an abscess comes; and if a hot abscess comes, let it be for some days until the abscess subsides; then set it even with the motion that you can do lightly and gently, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than those where there are pieces; then hold it as it is necessary hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, then stretch them from two parts, if it is hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small member, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand; and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the limb are disjoined, you straighten them by all means and join them in their places with the motion that you can do, and guard that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and join well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	"And feel with your hand whether it is well aligned or not: if it does not seem so, then straighten the limb gently without immobilizing it too tightly nor pressing on it as some do to cause inflammation and contracture of the limb, as we have said many times before."
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is set, ensure that the patient does not move it at all, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning nor in any other manner; and make sure that the limb is securely fastened so that they feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For if they feel no pain, it is not set properly, and you must position them so that they feel no pain; and ensure that it is set correctly, so that there are no twists when it is restored; and the condition of the broken limb is as I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	"Know that fractured limbs are diverse in size, length, and shape."
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar ones: they must be wrapped with soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg: they must be wrapped with a wide and strong bandage, for the wide bandage embraces the entire large limb and squeezes it evenly on all sides so that there is no gap; then tie it around with light pads, three or four turns depending on the limb, and press your hand a little on the whole bandage, then go up above the fracture and squeeze less so that the fracture can separate a little; and soften the bandage bit by bit until you grasp most of the healthy place, then take another bandage and wrap it around again on the broken place; then return to the part below the fracture and squeeze evenly, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first binding above; then put linen or cloth pads between the bandages so that they are all even, then tie everything together with a sling and then put well-made splints on it if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place upon it a warm, soothing ointment that draws out the swelling, and leave it like this for several days; then press with your hands or with something half as wide as a large cane reed, freshly cut, or with a piece of wood used to make wedges, or with a palm leaf rib, and shape them according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the bandage that you place on the fracture must be slightly thicker and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as necessary for the limb's size or thickness. Then press on the bandages just as you did at the first wrapping, then tie above with a suitable thread, as in the first wrapping over the fracture; tie more tightly at first, then looser; and the threads must be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen; for if the threads are thick, like those used by foolish people who make their bindings from twisted flax cords, it is a great error because the binding cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it should not have less than two fingers' width between each bandage.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the edges of the stitches after tightening in place, then put underneath them wads of linen or wool gauze so that it does not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When a wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that you should not tighten all the bandages on the broken limb immediately on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	When the limb is large, do not apply hot poultices until after 5 to 7 days, or more, depending on the heat of the emerging abscess; and here is the manner of the ancient emplastes for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of eggs, and apply this mixture, not too thin nor too thick, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster restoring breaks, dislocations and twists: take of gum arabic and myrrh and aloe and aloeswood, each .v. oz.; frankincense, also .v. oz; galangal, viij. oz; and grind them into powder, mixing it with albumen from an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and swiftly restores broken bones, useful to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of poultice that is good for twists: take mugwort and wormwood, each nine drams; myrrh and aloes, each eight drams; aconite six drams; bolic armenic ten drams, grind well, mix with water or plenty of eggs, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another manner of poultice for joints and bones out of their places, to alleviate pain and prevent the bone from being cut and broken: take new linen, soak it in warm water and cooked oil, and apply it on the place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore anything, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and removes pain appropriately.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to treat broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and earth peony leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way of using plaster for the healing of bone fractures and to soften the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of comfrey, camomile flowers, violet petals, wheat flour - each one part; grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, mix it with moistened coriander water or water, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger plaster for when a hard abscess comes to heal the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of comfrey, linseed, balm, melilot, safflower, violet and camomile flowers - each one part; grind and mix with salt water, fresh water or wine, according to the warmth of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	"Hippocrates writes in his book that one should apply to the broken limb only cerate made from wax and oil, with nothing else added. He says it should be neither too soft nor too hard."
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	"And it seems Galen that one should apply to the broken limb for restoration dry things a little warm, like myrrh and aloe and frankincense and similar substances, as we have said."
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	"Another method for poultice that is good for wound and pain: take mullein leaves, chicken feathers or hairs of shaven men, mugwort and common sow thistle in equal parts, grind them, mix with the grease."
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then remove it a few days later, and make sure the patient does not feel any pain or movement of the bone from its place; if there is pain at that spot or itching without rest or swelling, hurry up and remove the plaster immediately. Use a light cloth and wet sea sponge, dip it in water and apply to the area until the itching stops and the pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen moistened with rose oil on it and secure it with a bandage until you are sure there is no heat from the abscess; then start again with gentle binding and a little plaster, not pulling too tightly as before; continue until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	"And if you see that the boil is hot and red and painful and swollen have all disappeared, and you need poultice and wrapping again, then resume it, just as you did at first."
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	**And if it comes to nothing in the limb of what we have said, so let it not be dislocated but after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according as one sees, until the fracture appears, and the joining of the flesh approaches; then it holds more firmly than before, and the flesh grows thick, just as I have said earlier; and if you see the place drying out too much, know that nourishing cannot come to it; therefore apply hot water compresses, all the times that you dislocate it, and this should be every third day, and slacken the bandage a little; by this work thus the nourishing comes to the limb, and swiftly repairs what those foolish physicians do who reset the limb crookedly: this is wicked, and so are their works, and I see nothing else but letting [it] be and working rightly.**
des diverses manieres de brisure	"Regarding the various ways bones can break:"
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of fractures there are, and diverse forms, and the causes are distinguished; for there are fractures caused by percussive blow from a sword, and the neck bone shatters all the way down to the hip bone beneath it, like wood or stone; thus this manner of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	"Or the sword cuts across the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called 'absolute'; both these fractures have large or small wounds."
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	"And if there is impact with embossed blows, or splitting or crushing from stones, or falls onto stones, or other similar causes."
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	"And if there is a penetrating fracture that approaches the periosteum under the bone or goes through it, this type of fracture has large or small wounds."
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And yet there is fracture that is wound in the bone as fine as a hair, and the crack is small, thus this fracture is called "capillary"; and if the wound made by striking with stone or falling or similar cause brings the piece of bone inward, and the place hollows like a cauldron when struck on it; so enters stone within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often in those who have moist bones in the head, like a child's head; and it occurs in all these manners of fracture that small pieces are displaced like stars; and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	"And we recognize all kinds of fractures by their displacement, inspection, and the corrupted flesh that is on them."
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	"A capillary fracture is recognized because when the bone is uncovered and rubbed with a finger, the fracture appears black."
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	"In treating a fracture, beware of complications from illness. If you see no signs of bad accidents such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, spasms, fever, eyes protruding and turning red, or other similar symptoms in various conditions, then it cannot heal without doubt."
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	"But if you don't see any frightening accidents and hope for a good outcome, then begin the treatment."
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	"And when an injured person first comes to you in wintertime, it is necessary to reset the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury."
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	"And if it is in summertime, hurry to reset the bone before the seventh day, so that the periosteum under the bone does not become corrupted and the accidents we mentioned do not occur."
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone breaks reach the skin that covers the brain, then you must cut open the broken part as follows: take the patient's head and uncover the bone in every way possible, gently over the wound's shape. If bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone or a hot abscess appears, aid with what is necessary; then fill the space with dressings moistened in rose oil; let the wound rest until the hot abscess is eased and ensure there's no more bleeding. Then begin to remove the bone around it, done in two ways of working: one way is to cut narrowly ahead.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he applies another cut, larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is to have many cuts of varying sizes, some narrow and others wide, all pointed and made of fine iron. Work carefully so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	If the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary to drill around it before making cuts with chisels, taking care not to cut too deeply so that they pierce through the soft bone of the skull. Each chisel should have a guard or circle on top to prevent the point from penetrating too far into the bone. You should have several chisels so that each one fits properly in its place along the length of the bone, allowing you to have chisels for all types of skulls. These are the three ways to shape chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	To drill around the fractured bone, place one chisel on the bone and twist it with your hands until you feel that the bone has been pierced. Then move the chisel to another location a little further away and continue drilling all around the bone. Next, use incising chisels to remove the strip of bone between the holes, working as carefully and gently as possible so that you can easily grasp the bone with your hands or with tools such as tongs or forceps. Be sure not to touch the cerebellum or the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and cut the bone, then reset the sharp edge left by the bone with another tool resembling an awl, but it must be thinner and more delicate than other awls. If any small bones or scales remain, remove them gently with tweezers; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	The other method is that of Galen, which is quicker and involves using strong pressure, as he himself stated.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone where the break appears moved so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place underneath the head of this lenticular incision tool, of which this is the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side alone, for the parts are hot on both sides, such that the blade is towards the bone; then strike with a little hammer above, so that you gently tap the bone all around, and take great care of the skin that is underneath; if it adheres to the bone, remove it lightly, for it can be removed without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone break does not reach to the tissue, and the bone is only cut on top with small pieces, then cover that unevenness and remove the bone flakes with a fine razor file of which you should have several quantities to adapt best to each location according to the work and shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Then use coarse rasps first, and afterwards finer ones, until it is smooth enough.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	For each of the other types of capillary cuts and subtle breaks, you must adapt your approach according to its direction; this is not something that can be learned by someone who has not studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is exposed, then you must take one linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it upon the wound; then take another cloth doubled over two or three times, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can, so that you do not hurt the wound, then apply one more linen bandage on top, and do not pull it too tightly such that it only touches the wound; and leave it thus for one or two days until the inflammation has eased, then remove it, and administer medicines such as iris root, vetch flour, frankincense powder, and similar things; and from these things make a powder and place it upon the wound, and always apply soft medicines without biting; and ensure that the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave ointment nor let bowels assemble thereupon, for when bowels gather on the brain cloth, they will corrupt and decay, causing great harm to the patient; for when one places something biting upon the wound, it will necrotize above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, be very careful if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, and do not hesitate to doubt yourself.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackness comes from the medicine that has been applied, having such virtue, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix it with one drachm of wax, and put it on the face. Then treat him in various ways until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes both parts of the nose are broken at once, or just one by itself, for there are two bones there; the lower one is cartilage and does not break unless it is hit hard or twisted, but then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger or a reed into the nostril and place the break evenly against your index finger at the pouch below, until the nostril regains its natural shape. Do this gently and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then use a small rod about as thick as your finger to align it properly.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, then do likewise, and hasten to restore it on the first day if possible. If not, after the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided, then insert into the head of the nostril lint strips of linen cloth if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or insert another strip on the other side if the break is there; ensure that the strips are thick enough to fill the nostrils.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some surgeons say that one should grease the tents with butter and change them each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but rather the tents should be greased with a mixture of egg albumen and ground millstone. Then leave it alone until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Sometimes feathers from a goose are used instead of strips, with a soft cloth wrapped around them to keep the break in place while the patient breathes through it; do whatever you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if inflammation occurs in the nose while you are working on it, then insert softened wax or cotton moistened with rose oil or a little diacylgonine.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no abscess forms, then apply this plaster: ground sesame flour and incense powder mixed with egg white. Then place light dressings on it and do not bind tightly. If the fracture in the nose is small but broken into many pieces, extract them using appropriate tools, then sew up the wound and treat it with appropriate plasters and ointments for healing flesh wounds. And if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents and apply splints of lead until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken below and there is no wound on the outside, and the break is only on the outside with no fracture inside, it can be easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side of the jawbone, insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; if it is on the left side, use your right hand and gently insert your index finger behind the break, then align it with your other hand from outside.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is displaced in two places, then provide traction on both sides until it is aligned.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth are displaced or broken due to movement of the jawbone fracture, then fix them with a gold, silver, or silk thread. Apply wax on the broken jawbone and place a doubled cloth over it; then put a well-made splint or a piece of leather on top, matching the length and width of the jawbone, secure it to the cheek where possible, and instruct the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the alignment has changed, remove it on the third day and reposition it correctly. Apply a plaster made of flour mixed with egg albumen or sesame flour after removing the wax; then apply light linen over it. If the plaster remains effective and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it heals, which usually takes three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if inflammation occurs, administer the treatments we have mentioned many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both fracture and wound together, ensure that no piece of bone is missing; carefully remove it with appropriate instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have removed all these pieces and there are none left, then sew the wound closed if it is wide, and apply some bandages to prevent infection until it heals.
de la forcele	With tweezers
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The shoulder blade can break several times in front, towards the shoulder, and there are three ways this fracture can occur:
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	"And the work is such when there's no wound, that you should have two assistants: one to hold the arm which feels broken; and the other stretch the neck towards the part. Then place the break evenly on your two hands so that its shape is as it should be, without appearance or displacement."
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	"And if you need to stretch further, place under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of cloth or wool, and its size according to your necessity. Then extend and lift the arm, gripping the ball with your hand so that you can align the break evenly as it should be."
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	"And if you cannot pull the head of the arm forward because it is deeply set, then the patient must lie on their back and place a medium-sized pillow under the shoulder. Then push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the arm is lifted."
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	"And then align the break with your two hands. If it is displaced, you must cut above it. Gently pull out the pieces and if the bone cannot meet due to any obstacle, cut one of the incisions that you have made. But place this instrument under the arm to support the joint:"
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it should resemble a spoon, and not be lifted up, and be as wide as is necessary according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two heads, as you see, one wide and the other narrow like the opening of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of hot abscess, then cut the wound open, and if the opening is small where you doubt a hot abscess, then fill the wound with rags and bandages according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	"And if hot inflammation occurs, soak a bandage in rose oil mixed with honey and vinegar, and place it on top."
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The treatment of bone fractures when there are no wounds or cuts is as follows: place the poultice made from millet flour and egg white on the bone, then apply light bandages, and place a support under the armpit if necessary. Then take a very wide bandage about a palm's width, put a doubled cloth over the bandages and poultice, then wrap it tightly with an elastic band three fingers wide and long so that both ends of the bandage hang down. Place the elastic band on the fracture and wrap the bandage around the neck and under the healthy shoulder blade and under the fractured one, tightening each part individually. When you see that the bandages hold the fracture in place and that the elastic band does not move over the broken bone, reinforce it every day until the bindings loosen. Then make the patient lie on their back and place a small pillow under the armpit to lift the shoulder up. Lighten the pressure on the fracture by supporting the shoulder with a sling tied around the neck; do not untie it unless an accident occurs, for up to twenty days. Then resume the poultice if necessary, continue to tighten and leave it as is until restored. It takes about twenty-eight days to heal, but some people may take less time.
de la brisure de l’espaule	"About the break of the shoulder:"
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the shoulder bone breaks or moves out of its proper place, and it cannot be perceived except by touch; arrange it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form in every possible way; then place on the spot powder from a millstone with abundance of eggs, and light dressings, and cover it with a double cloth. Then place over it a wide and thin bandage, somewhat wider than the shoulder, and if there are hairs under the bandage in some part of the shoulder, fill that hair with linseed dressings so that the bandage lies evenly; and then bind it firmly all around with a large bandage so that the bandage does not move from its place. Look at the dressing each day; and every time it moistens, bind it again, and put the bandage back in its proper place if it has moved. Have the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be reset in 20 or 25 days. And when this number is completed, untie it, and be assured, for it is not a bone that can move easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	"And if a fragment of the bone sticks out and is not under the heart, then cut it off and proceed as we have said in treating the fracture of the collarbone to appease any hot inflammation."
de la brisure dou pis	"About the break of the arm:"
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the back.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it droops downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks support, and faints suddenly, sometimes vomiting blood, and the horse's eye appears in the broken bone.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And the restoration is that the patient lies often on their back with a cushion between the shoulders. Then press the shoulders down and bring together the ribs of the two lower sides gently but firmly until the bones are aligned correctly. Then place dressings and bandages over a thin strip of salt or light wood, wrap it in cloth, and bind it to the broken bone so that it does not move. Wrap the bandage around the back and tie it securely. Check the dressing every hour and tighten it if it loosens. If it needs to be removed due to corrosion, itching, pain, or inflammation, do so quickly and reapply a new dressing. Then bind it again until it is healed."
de la brisure des costes	"About the break of the ribs:"
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	"Know that rib fractures only occur in large areas of the back and chest. They are not broken except by blows to these areas and can be felt clearly upon examination."
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you set the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a splint and bind it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	"And if the rib fracture leans inwards, the patient feels great pain and sharpness like that of pleurisy because the bone pierces the lung. They experience shortness of breath, weakness, and vomiting of much blood. This is a serious condition, and the ancients considered it deadly."
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	"And there are those who say that one should administer foods that cause the belly to swell in order to push the fracture back into place."
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	"We do not do this because hot inflammation may arise if it has not already been present."
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	"But if it is already present, we treat it."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	"And some say that one should place cups on the area to draw out blood forcefully, and this seems reasonable. However, there is doubt whether the cups attract impurities to the site due to the weakness of the body."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	"And some say that one should cover the area with a warm woolen cloth moistened in oil and place splints between the ribs to align the fracture, then treat it like pleurisy with foods and medicines."
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels such severe pain that they cannot bear it due to the bone pressing against the bandage, and there is doubt about the state of the limb, then one must cut over the location of the broken bone, placing something underneath the instrument to protect the skin. Then one should trim the bone lightly and gently pull it out, after which one should stitch up both sides of the wound if it is large, and apply splints until it heals properly.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess appears, place moist cloths soaked in rose oil on it and apply them to the location. Treat the location as necessary for an abscess, and keep the patient lying on that side until they are healed.
de la brisure dou col	Of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never does a break of the bone of the neck occur, and rarely does it bend; and also with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note if their hands are softened, swollen, and insensitive, unable to move or stretch, and when pricked with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many cases. If they move and feel when restrained or pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar condition occurs in the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note if their feet are softened, and if the accident has occurred that is present in hands, and windy ventosity and excretion occur without voluntary control; and when they lie on their belly, excretion occurs without voluntary control.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he falls asleep on his back and wants to mount [a horse], then he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Such are those who are mortal: do not labor in their care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, then it is the lesser of the two evils.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you watch if there is any hot abscess, then put rose oil or linseed oil on the spine until it is appeased; then put one of the comforting and drying poultices on it, and hold it down with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not let them sleep on that part where they feel the pain until they are healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone comes out of joint, then cover the chest; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with one stitch, then treat it with ointment for internal wounds until it is healed. And if the bone of the knee is broken, which is called the 'knee cap', put your left hand's pouch on it and hold it even with the other hand by force, then put the poultice and splint on it if necessary; then bind it up, and if there are any bones out of joint, open them up and remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	And concerning the breaking of the thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It can happen that the thighbone is broken, and if it happens, there will be little harm to the head. And it opens up on the long side, and inclines toward the parting of the thighs, and pain and soreness come to the person where it breaks, and it swells at that place.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you stretch your hand out until you are over the break. And know what the break is like and its shape. And if the break is only at the top, then put it back in place until it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is on the long side or inclines inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can clearly see the restoration of that break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it back in place, then put a poultice on it, then put a splint made of wood or bone on it and bind the break so that it does not move. And hold the area under the ribs until the bandage is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if any hot abscess comes, do not touch it until the hot abscess is appeased. And then put on what we have said before. And then return to the restoration and bind it as it should be, if there are no bad accidents. And that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	And concerning the breaking of the elbow
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The elbow is that which is between the arm and the shoulder blade. And if it is broken, it should be restored in one of two ways: either by taking a piece of smooth wood like this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie two pieces of wood together with two ropes and hang them up high. And make the patient sit on a chair. Then lay their broken arm on the wood so that it hangs down and rests in a curve of wood. Then put some heavy weight or let the minister pull it down. Then the master should put the break back in place with both hands until it is correctly aligned.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is that one places the patient on their back, and they lay their hand on their neck, then commands two helpers: one to hold what is above the break of their hands, and the other to hold below all in one line, stretching each one to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then press down on the lien below and above the break, and extend each of the assistants to their respective sides.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, then place one lien in the middle under the thigh, and another towards the side, under the fracture; and likewise if the fracture is towards the side, then lightly place a lien without labor, so that the fracture is even on its site and on the side; then set the fracture evenly as it should be, and hold it steady, if no inflammation comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if inflammation occurs, do not stretch it until the twenty-seventh day, and put a warm moist cloth on the axilla and rose oil until the inflammation is appeased; then stretch it, and the manner of stretching is as follows: place the splint on the break, then bring the arm onto the supporter, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the bandage, and stretch it onto the supporter and onto the arm so that the arm is in line with the stars, if nothing prevents it from being stretched, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, then use stars (traction devices) and place a larger and stronger star on the break than the others, with two fingers' space between each star, and let each star be large enough to pass the break three fingers from each side; then stretch onto the stars, as I said at the beginning of this chapter about stretching on the break, but more strongly and without pulling apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the setting of the splints and the binding as we have said, in the time when you are resetting the broken limb, and you doubt the hot inflammation, then leave it bound for seven days as we have said; then examine each day for three days after the binding to ensure that no pruritus or swelling comes to the site, so that the nourishment cannot come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, then let him not be untied until after 3 days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach. Place one cushion full of even wool under the shoulder blade, and watch every hour of the day or night to ensure that the broken limb does not move or the ligaments soften; then apply the plaster by the power of medicine, and give him the food we have mentioned earlier, in such a way that at first it is subtle, but when he begins to recover, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset forty days after, then one should untie them and apply baths and ointment medications to set them in place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the restriction is ugly and stuck on, it must remain untied for forty days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Here is a possible translation of the passage on "la brisure du bras" (breakage of the arm) from the medical treatise "Cirurgia" by Guy de Chauliac:
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones called the two "fuscile", one of which is small and extends to the wrist; the other is large and located beneath towards the little toe. Sometimes only the large "fuscile" breaks, or sometimes only the small one does, and occasionally both together do so.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the little bones are broken, the restoration is easy, and so is the healing; but when the big ones are broken, healing is difficult, and more serious if they break one by one.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, it should be gently extended and set straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	But if it's the large bone, you must pull harder; and extend it over the cushion, and draw the little finger higher than the others, and let the thumb be lower than the others, and have the patient lie crossed on themselves, with the cushion placed high before them so they feel no strain. Then stretch the minister's left arm towards the bottom of the patient's hand or elbow, and another minister should help with the other side above it.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then the physician sets it straight according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break there are pieces missing, then each must be placed back in its proper place. If any piece is still unable to grasp the heart, and cannot be restored to its original position, then one should cut above and below the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the break there is also a wound, I have spoken of it in the chapter on special cases; so take care accordingly.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if swelling occurs at the beginning of restoration, take a bandage made from rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft, and wrap it gently over the swelling until it subsides.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the cerote, and place there the emplaustre of the powder from the mill with abundant egg. Then put in the staples, and let the staple for breaking be always stronger, and a bit wider than the others. And know that it must have six staples on the arm in various positions: whether the breaker is in one bone or two; and let it be straighter above the breaker than elsewhere, and always less strained apart, as I said at the beginning of the chapter. And let the drapels which are on the breaker be soft and moist, not hard nor rough. And let the threads with which it is strained be of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the lien after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident occurs to the member, such as itching which comes to the member, then you must rinse the member with hot water until that itching is appeased; and let the member rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin the straitening, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, so address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you are careful that the nourishment cannot reach the member because it is too tightly bound, then you should loosen it a little and let it rest like this for a few days until the nourishment comes to it, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, then do not untie it for up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or whoever around, then he can put his hands to his neck, and keep his neck even, and guard against movement and twisting, and sleep on his back; and know that this dislocation is healed in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the humors.
de la brisure de la main	Chapter 21: On the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and also on the forearms there are few fractures, but many dislocations occur.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or dislocated, then let the patient sit cross-legged and sit upright directly in front of him, evenly; then place his hand on a cloth laid out flat, and extend the broken bones by the minister, and join them evenly by the master, so that they are well-aligned. Then apply the plaster and splints if there is no swelling present, then place one splint according to the size of the affected area; and let it be wrapped in a linen bandage.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	"And if the fracture is on the inner side around the belly of the foot, make a bandage of cloths and instruct the patient to press it onto their broken foot; then hold it with a long cloth strip, and let the knot be soft as large as the sole of the hand, and secure it in place."
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	"And if the fracture is on the backside, then you must place a bandage above and another below in the sole of the foot so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand, and make sure the binding between the two is secure."
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	"And if the fracture occurs at any of our fingers, if it's the thumb, then align it properly; and bind it with the sole of the foot, and if you see fit place a small, straight splint to elevate the fracture and prevent movement. And if the fracture is on another finger, such as the index or one of the others, then align it and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or tie them all together in one binding, whichever is better, or place a splint above like on the thumb; and beware of inflammation and arrange for hot poultice treatment, and secure whatever comes from it, as I have said."
de la cuixe brisie	"About a broken thighbone:"
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	"The thighbone is often broken and it is evident when it rotates forward or backward; and the treatment for this is to bind one tie above the fracture and another below."
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	"And the patient lies on their face, then each of the attendants extends his tie to his side equally; this is when the fracture is within the bone."
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the dislocation is near the root of the thigh, then let one ligament be towards the hilt, and the other ligament below the dislocation.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And similarly if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be near the knee, and let the extension be downwards; then the physician puts the bone even with both hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then applies the splint and bandage, if there is no abscess coming out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	"And if there is heat inflammation, allow it to subside before returning to your work and treatment; the binding is done in this manner."
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture a hard doubled bandage of two or three layers, and retain the excess, then twist the leg until the heel reaches the root of the thigh, and insert one long thread between the hip and the leg, near the knee from below, and bring the ends of the thread upwards; then wrap the bandage around the leg and hip, then place splints on the fracture, and place one splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and hip with soft cloths to evenly distribute pressure, then begin to tie firmly three or four turns on the fracture; and as you go higher up the fracture, tie less tightly; then take the two heads of the thread that you inserted between the leg and hip, and tie three splints that are above, then return below to the head of the thread until you reach near the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this until no abscess or swelling appears.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	"And if inflammation occurs, untie it and address whatever comes from it, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, they should be removed if possible; and if not, then the space should be split open and pus drawn out; and treat it as we have said until it is healed."
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	"And sometimes the thighbone is fractured in such a way that splints are placed on it, as in the case of the arm; nevertheless, the patient does not limp when the fracture is treated in this manner."
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	"And know that the thighbone is restored in about one month, or a little less or more, according to the different constitutions."
de la ruelle dou genoil	"About the knee joint"
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the tendon of the knee there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then it is only a crack or hole, and this happens in every wound, and without wound, and this everyone feels.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is like this: put what is broken back onto its two sides so that it can be assembled and moved. Then put on a splint, and if necessary, use a rounded staple to hold it in place, then tighten as needed. Then rewrap all the bandages we mentioned earlier for other fractures, such as hot compresses and similar treatments. Put whatever treatment is appropriate for each condition so that it heals properly.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that the leg has two bones, of which one is rightly called «mustelz», and the other «foscile»; and it undergoes the same breaking as the arm does, and for this reason the treatment is the same as that of the arm, and the work is all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the "mustelz" bone is broken, it turns inward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and it can be seen clearly; and it turns beneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore prepare an extension and place it evenly, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the break is ugly and there are many fragments, then the extension should be smaller and lighter, and adjust it according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when you have completed your task, then take two strips of wood, hollowed out to fit around the leg on either side, and long enough from just below the knee downwards. Then wrap each strip with a bandage above and below, tie them together in the middle so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, which is good; some people also use one splint made of wood, long enough for the leg, and place it there to prevent movement, especially where there is a wound. And every day move the leg gently to see if there is any heat or other infection. Until then, continue treating until it is healed."
de la brisure des os dou piet	"On the breaking of bones in the foot"
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	"The ankle does not experience any fractures, but sometimes a bone in the foot and the toes can be broken, and there is often contusion in various positions."
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	"And if there is a fracture of the bone in the foot and you see the bones protruding one over the other, then place your foot on the ground like someone who wants to walk, and put your own foot now on his where the bones are raised. Then press down until they return to their original position; then apply the splint and padding. Place a small tray with two holes under the sole of the foot, then strap it tightly around the foot with bandages and other necessary materials."
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	"And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage because you will find that the bones are aligned again, whether they were broken or dislocated."
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	"And if there are any broken toes, then set them back in place as we have described for the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint along the length of the toe and slightly wider. Place the tray that I mentioned under the foot and strap it tightly around it. If there are two or three or more broken toes, then place a splint on each one according to its size, wrapped in a cloth of linen, and strap the tray under the foot. And let them rest on top of the tray so that they are well supported."
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	"And you should not forget the other things that we have mentioned for other fractures. Treat each case according to its nature."
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	"On the fracture of the bone of the wrist"
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, make her sit wide-legged, then incline her towards the back part, and let her be held from behind. Then fill the hollow of the woman with cotton, putting in as much as one stone. Then lower the woman gently and gradually raise her back until the cotton reaches the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the stone. And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, replace it. Do this for about seven days or so: then the break will be healed. And if you want to see, take a sheep's bladder, tie a tube at the opening, and put the whole bladder inside the nature. Then blow into the tube forcefully until the bladder is inflated within. Then the nature will return to its original state; then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the little finger of man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said concerning the thighbone. These breaks are not hidden from those who apply their study and practice, and let them hear my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break indicates in many ways the right path to restoration; therefore, listen.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	For a broken penis, take a goose's gut and put it around the penis. Then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three or four days, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	If there is a break with an open wound:
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	He who has a fracture with wound, especially if it is large, as in the thigh bone or shoulder bone or similar, should be bandaged now, so that the bandages we have mentioned witness this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, you should then rinse with vinegar, or with whatever else you have available, and immediately afterwards reset the fracture that same hour, or on the following day, if a physician is not present.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if a physician is present, then wait until the ninth day to reset the fracture, until the inflammation has subsided. Do not touch it on the third or fourth day either, for you would thereby cause an evil outcome
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone fracture is apparent above the chest and exposed, then it is necessary for you to carefully align it with your hands, with minimal extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not sufficient to align it with your hands, then use this tool made of iron, which is either twenty-seven or eighteen inches long, and its width should correspond to the size of the wound. It is necessary for a physician to mold three or four of these tools according to what is needed in each case of fracture; it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the member being treated, and it should have a pointed end and be thicker at its midpoint, as follows:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palm" because the curved bone should be placed on top of the exposed head of the bone; press them together at once until they align evenly with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is slight and the tool cannot grasp the bone well, then you must cut off the head of the bone so that the tool can gain purchase.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you are unable to realign the bone as previously mentioned, then use an appropriate tool such as a chisel or knife to cut it with all your might. Then, remove any remaining sharp edges and small splinters from the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset but the patient still feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Do so until it is in its natural place. Then moisten a cloth in black stiptic wine and apply it gently if it is summer. Do not put cerote or other oily substances on the wound, as they will cause rot and corruption. Then apply splints once you have reset the bone, leave the wound open, and cut away excess skin around the wound according to its size. Be sure that the wound is not constrained with the break, for many foolish physicians have done this and caused harm or death upon the patient. Make the bandage softer and more gentle than usual for other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil may come of it, as we have said, and you find pain in its place, then one must not put on bandages; but wrap it tightly around with firm cloths, and bind it.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when after one or two days you see the wound begin to heal, then remove what you have put on it with all wine, and apply healing salve to it, such as tetrafarmacum and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must massage the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is warm and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	"And the limb must be positioned in such a way that the bowstring runs down easily."
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	"And even if many days pass and the bone still cannot unite but again dislocates, know that there are small fragments of bone causing this pain, so you must treat the wound with a compress and remove all these unwanted fragments."
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula appears in the place, or other kind of corruption, then you must treat it according to what is said in this chapter beforehand.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and lies open upon the limb, such as the hipbone or shoulder blade, or other similar large bones, then do not pull it out, for many times death results from it; but leave it until it rots. Perhaps it will fall out by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	"from the bruises that come from the soldering"
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	"We often inquire about the health of the limb after a fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and the appearance of the limb can be unpleasant; sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions."
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	"Therefore, be careful if the bone is fresh: if the limb swells up, apply medicines that are astringent, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others. Take any of these things or all together and mix them with wine that is astringent or with egg yolk or with vinegar; then place it on the swelling in bandages, and tie it tightly and do not untie it for several days; then remove it and start again until the swelling has disappeared. Or you can tie it around a piece of well-made lead; for the property of lead is that it removes all swellings from limbs. And if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut it open on top and remove the excess flesh. Or have it shaved by some barber until it is gone, and treat it until it is healed."
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	"of the limb that is weak after a dressing"
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored,
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat,
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	"When a limb is twisted after an injury,"
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	"If a limb is twisted after healing, and the bone breaks open, and the shape of the limb is unsightly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land; and such procedures are blameworthy, and great evils arise from them, and even death may result. Nevertheless, if the dislocations and twistings are fresh, then they ought to be fomented with hot water, or mollifying herbs should be cooked, like willow leaves, roots, and melilot, and similar things; and make one mollifying plaster, like diacylгон well-made, and take the musk of willow, and confect it with goose fat or sesame oil, and apply the plaster; or take figs and grind them with coltsfoot leaves and similar medicines that soften the union.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes dislocation occurs due to continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And arrange for the limb to be moved every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	"And if the twistedness is old and hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed by iron, then it should be cut down to the bone with a delicate and light scalpel; and pay close attention and take care in treating it."
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	"Here begins the book of dislocations"
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	"A dislocation occurs when a joint is displaced from its proper place, so that it cannot move, and the limb is misshapen, and the patient feels great pain and great injury."
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	"When dislocation happens to anyone, it should be immediately reduced without delay."
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	But if one delays, the place swells up, and sometimes it is scarcely reset in its place; therefore do not move the limb when it is swollen: often it brings about gangrene and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, have the patient lie down, then leave him until the inflammation has subsided; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and cure each limb as they come into their place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	"And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head down to the feet."
des mandibules	"jaw dislocation"
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	"Rarely does the jaw become dislocated outward, and there are two kinds of dislocation in both cases: either it is slightly displaced from its proper place and softened a little; or it is completely dislocated and hangs down towards the chest, so that saliva flows out of the mouth and he cannot hold it in nor close his mouth, and he wraps his tongue with speech."
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	"When the dislocation is small, it returns to its proper place through several positions."
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay; and in such a manner that the assistants hold the patient's head, and the physician puts his fist into one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two hands are placed equally to apply pressure; and instruct the patient to relax his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	"And the physician places it back in its proper place until it returns to its original position."
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	"If the dislocation is severe, especially if it affects both jaws simultaneously, then apply warm water and oil soaks until the dislocated parts become slightly softened; do not force the reduction, as we have said."
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, then place moistened cloths made of rose oil and wax on it, then lightly bind it with soft bandages; and let the patient sleep on his back, his head held still between two pillows so that he does not move to either side nor exert himself in chewing, but take light food until the pains are gone and the jaws are healed; and then he may chew what he wants easily, and need not strain to open his mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaw is fully healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	"And if the two jaws cannot be reduced properly within an hour and are not returned to their original position, then fever and other constitutional symptoms may arise, sometimes diarrhea, sometimes vomiting of bile."
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	"When you see these signs, know that it is a serious condition; many people die from this within nine days."
de la forcelle	"of the jawbone"
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	"The jawbone cannot dislocate inwards along its length and within the throat; however, it can sometimes be dislocated outwards at the chin, which is quite noticeable."
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back and extends his arms; then firmly press the place with your palm, and it will return; then place the emplaster and bandage, and bind it tight; and the shoulder which is towards the side cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it dislocates even once, reset it to its place as we have said; then place the emplaster and bandage, and bind it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and likewise the head of the shoulder is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	"On shoulder dislocation"
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder dislocates only in three ways: one is that it dislocates at the part of the elbow below; and the second is at the part of the armpit; and sometimes it dislocates above, but this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind due to the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the elbow, especially in those who have much flesh, for in these ones it snaps quickly; in those who have little flesh, it barely jumps out, and returns quickly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men that there is an injury or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot boil, and they believe that it has dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore you must examine it until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that dislocations are recognizable when they are below towards the elbow, and there is a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, which you will find clearly manifest in their diversity; and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and below the elbow touching the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring their hand close to their side nor move it in any way; and likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly upon touching; and this manner of dislocation is difficult to reset when it is old or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the physician lifts the sick person's hand upwards, then places their elbows under the buttocks and pulls the joint forcibly upwards; and the physician lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it beneath, it will quickly return.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said within several days after, then it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in warm water; and let them be administered moistening and soothing remedies, such as a decoction of marshmallow and fenugreek and melilot in water, and this should be applied. Then let the patient be propped up on their back, and place under the armpit a pillow of even consistency, not too soft nor too hard. Then the physician places their heel on the pillow, gently lifts the virtuous head of the shoulder, and pulls the hand of the patient; and another attendant holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downwards. Thus, the shoulder comes back into place, and if you wish to reset it according to this manner: have present a man who is taller than the patient, standing straight against the side. He places his shoulder under the armpit of the patient and lifts the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs from the arm; and another attendant pulls the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, hang with him some heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is also reset in another way: and this is that one drives a long stick into the ground, with which the head of the shoulder is as round as the pistol, and neither too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the patient, but let him have soft cloths beneath, and the patient stands on the length of the wood; then his hand is stretched down on the other side appropriately, and the joint returns to its place quickly; and if it will not return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a stick of II arms in width and IIII palms in breadth, which has the head round enough for the mouth to enter deep beneath the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place soft cloths on the head of the wood so that the wood does not bruise the sick person, then place it under the buttocks of the sick person; extend the arm along the length of the wood and tie the bandage to the wood and at the elbow of the hand, then place the arm upon a support made from a bone as wide as possible, and let the hand hang down, and leave the body hanging on the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, whatever way that may be, then you must place under the buttocks a pillow of even wool; then apply the plaster prepared with powder from a millstone, with incense and egg white all around the shoulder and bind it firmly under the buttocks, turn the bandage over the plaster, and wrap the hand around its neck, and let the hand remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that they should eat little until the member is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly; and then they may eat more afterwards after five or six days, and move about; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for another cause, then you must administer cauteries at III points, as it is set forth in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this and after twenty days the joint still does not stay in place, nor can they raise their arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set back in its proper place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation which is towards the breast and the nipples, or behind them, is caused by a blow or stretching of the hand, and another bandage should be applied; and care should be taken until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing there comes pain in the member and slowness in movement, then the sick person should bathe many times until that pain is alleviated and returns to its former state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Regarding dislocation of the elbow
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated outward and returns inward; and if it is dislocated in all directions, especially front and back, then the dislocation has not been reduced, because one can see it well and feel it clearly; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick limb with the sound one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is crushed, and it cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reduce it before abscesses occur there because if an abscess occurs then the reduction will be painful and perhaps cannot be reduced entirely, especially when it is behind; such a dislocation is worse than others and causes great pain and sometimes gangrene may occur
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the reduction is when it can be done thus: you should extend their hand with both of your hands; and their arm should be spread wide, and the hands of the doctor according to the elbow around, over, and under, and push the joint into its place at the base of the thumb or at the root of the palm until it returns to its proper position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when you fold their hand onto your hand and push the elbow that is dislocated from the root of the palm towards you.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and indeed two assistants extend the arm, and two assistants hold it, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm on each side, then wrap a doubled cloth long and wide around it; and when the physician has joined the joint with his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint forcibly until it returns; and when it is in place, then put dry compresses with powdered egg yolk on it, and hold it firmly, and suspend the arm around the neck of the patient, and leave it for a few days, then untie it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly set in its place, he unties the bandage and leaves it alone; but if you see that the joint has not healed properly, then begin again with the compress and the bandage, leaving it like this for several days until it is securely placed; then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if it feels pain afterwards when the joint has been reset, and it moves again, then bathe and rub it gently and press until it is soothed; or put on the joint a poultice of fatty mutton grease, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; and when he sweats, then rub the joint temperately, then replace the poultice, and then enter the bath again; and do this twice or three times until it is healed; and if you see fit, then put on fern of hot moist chicory with butter, and hold it there; thus it will return to its proper condition.
li dislocation de la main	Dislocation of the hand:
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joints of the hand are dislocated, and their return is easy,
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is thus: you place the sick hand on a table, and the servant extends the hand, and the physician places it evenly, so that he places his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns completely. Then you must look to see if it is properly in place; then the patient places the back of their hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient places their backhand on the table, and the physician places their hand over that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good; if not, then press with soothing plasters and leave it thus without beginning again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, then the joint remains twisted; and does not harm the patient any further than as long as the hand is crippled, and can grip nothing at all: know then that the nerves or arteries are cut; so there is no other way to heal it but by cautery near the case, and perhaps nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	"And when the hand is in place, then apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then unbind it and leave it thus."
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if he cannot move it well, and there is any stiffness, then moisten with hot water, and rub it until it becomes soft."
de la dislocation des dois de la main	This appears to be a heading or title in Old French: "Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand".
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Both thumbs of the hand may be dislocated on either side, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly; therefore, if dislocation has occurred, press it back into place until it returns. Then hold the top of the thumb and tilt it towards the part where it was dislocated. Leave it for two days, then reset it on the third day and wrap it tightly as we have said. Remove the bandage on the fourth day and move the thumb gently, then bind it again. Repeat this often until it is secure. Do likewise if the thumb is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do everything in the same manner until it is healed.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	This appears to be a heading or title in Old French: "Of the dislocation of the spine of the back".
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	"When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no remedy, because the patient is already dead."
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign is that evacuations occur involuntarily and cannot be held back. Sometimes certain limbs become softened, such as both thighs or both arms, or even the spine moves in four parts; this one which moves at the back is called 'gilbositis'. If gilbositis has come from infancy, there is no cure nor healing for it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those that come from falls or impacts or similar things, the ancients prescribed various remedies with grand words, but not all had great benefit; however, I have summarized them according to my intention and formed tools in diverse manners.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes to the breast before, none has health; and likewise that which comes directly to both sides, and one can only cure properly that which comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient be extended on his face evenly, and have support underneath him so he does not bruise himself; then stick one stake at the head firmly into the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a band around the hips of the patient, and another at the thighs, knees, and ankles; and two servants shall hold the bands, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes; and let them be held fast, the stake as we have said, and the physician place his palms firmly on the spine until it yields.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, then take a board of three spans long and place it under the skin, with the patient on their side. Insert the end of the board under the skin, then place the middle of the board on the spine; let the physician put his feet on the other end of the board and press until it returns to its proper place. And if you wish, do this in turns for the shoulder that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you drive two stakes into the head of the patient's arm, one of a great span apart, and towards the feet two others, with a palm's breadth of space between each stake above and below. And let there be a hole in each stake where the joint turns, and let the stakes be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move. And between each pair of stakes let there be one turning stake on which the joint turns, and let there be two small stakes of a palm's length for turning the joint. Then tie the bandage that is among the stakes to the joint towards the head, and the other bandage towards the feet at the other joint, and each minister turn their stake with all the bandages, and the master shall set the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is equal, place a drying plaster with plenty of egg on top, then the dressings, and then apply the iron from a tablet three fingers long, pressing on the location of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and let the patient rest quietly until they are healed; and if any problem arises at the end of their recovery, administer softening and soothing medicines along with the iron we mentioned earlier; sometimes one may even apply a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance resembles dislocation in the lower spine, but do not presume this is dislocation: it could bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	"on dislocations of the hip"
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	"Know that at the joints of the hip and shoulder only dislocations occur, not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is unstable in four directions: inside and outside, front and back; but more unstable inside than others, and little unstable in front and back."
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the sign of its dislocation within is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, the sick one appears longer, and the sick knee joint opens more widely, and the sick person cannot bend their knee at the fire; and the place near where there is heat and swelling is also dislocated, because the head of the thighbone has moved there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who is afflicted by this is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of one who has it before him is that he stretches his leg well according to its length; nevertheless, he cannot bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot do so, and he retains his urine, and the angle swells, and when he walks, he limps on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of one who has it behind him is that he cannot straighten his knee or bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the angle is softened, and the buttock is placed under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment for this type of dislocation is that you should examine whether the dislocation is old or new, and if it has remained in its position without care, then there will be no need for treatment, and he must not have any swelling.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the case where dislocation is recent,
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare the assistant strongly, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or where it is bound on the knee; and another assistant extends his hand thus that he places his hands under his buttocks, then pulls gently on a soft rope attached to the hip; and another holds the head of the rope; and all extend upwards and downwards at once until the patient lifts off the ground together.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	"This manner of extension applies to four types of dislocations, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good."
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	But if not, then you must treat its similarity. When the dislocation is at the hip joint, you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the rope on the root of the hip and the place beneath the angle, then pull the rope upwards towards the angle and towards the forceps. Then another assistant takes the patient's arms and embraces the great bone of the sick hip, and extends it strongly outwards: now it will return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot bind it in this manner that we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a soft strong rope on the two heels and on the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two spans more than the other; then hang him from the top of a pole, and let him be two arm-lengths above the ground; then command one servant to embrace the hip joint, and let another servant hang with the patient, who embraces firmly the hip joint, for the dislocation returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the front, then let the patient lie down, as we have said in that case who has gout; and draw one rope over the affected leg properly, and over the foot also. Then place two stakes, one at the head and one at the feet, and stick one stake between the thighs of the patient in this manner: And have moist cloths ready around it so that the patient does not blister. Then let each servant extend towards him, and the physician put his hand equally on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place a board and press thus as we said in the condition of the ribs; have the patient lie on his sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	"And when the dislocation is towards the front, one must extend the dislocated leg quickly, as I have said; then the surgeon places their knee on the angle of the dislocated hip, presses with their other hand above it, and extends it downwards towards the knee."
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, do not extend the patient downwards or lift him up, but have him lie as if his hip were dislocated backwards, as we said about childbirth on the two hips; and place him on his face, with his leg extended as we said earlier, and press on the joint with a board; this will be done when the patient extends his legs and they are even. Then join the thighs, apply the splint, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move. Let him rest for three or four days, then untie it and reapply the splint. If they appear equal, bind again as before and leave it for three days. Then untie it and let the patient walk gently until his limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	**Treatment of Dislocations of the Knee**
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, inside and outside, and behind; it does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the hip, and if it does not align with the hip, know that they are dislocated. And the treatment for all such cases is as follows: make the patient sit upright, extend their leg if possible, place your back on their thigh, and put their foot on yours; then grasp their knee with your palms and pull it between your thighs, then bend both sides of the knee forcefully. Another assistant should extend the patient's foot until the knee returns to its proper place, and the sign that it is properly aligned is when the leg lightly touches the hip. Then apply the plaster and bind the leg to the hip tightly for three or four days before removing it. The patient should not walk until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not yet fully aligned, then extend it forcefully as we have described in the treatment of dislocation of the thigh, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Regarding the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel can sometimes be injured and sometimes fully dislocated both inward and outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen, and it points forward at the part where it is dislocated; the reduction is easy, and one should gently extend the arm with both hands when it is merely agitated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit upright, and hold him firmly by the leg above the ankle with your left hand; then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then lift it up and gently place the foot up high; do this twice, alternating between pulling and lifting the foot; if it returns, that's good. If not, then begin the procedure again, for it will return. And if it cannot be returned in this manner, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and firmly plant a pole in the earth between his thighs, tying cloths around it so as not to wound the patient; then one minister should hold the thigh, and another extend the foot with both hands or tie it to the collar of the foot; then each minister should stretch evenly, and the pole should always be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient steady when he is stretched. Then the master puts his hands on the dislocation, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is ready, then place the plaster and bandages on it, and press firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligature is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature loosens, then press it again; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if they walk before this time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"If inflammation occurs, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere until the patient is healed."
des dois	I'm here to help! Please provide me with more context or information about what you'd like assistance with regarding "des doi" (which translates to "the two of them").
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	"If the two joints are dislocated, they should be gently stretched without force, and it is an easy thing to do."
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the ankle, then you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on two boards so that they are completely straight, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns; and when it is even and nothing opens, then place two boards under the sole of the foot, then press firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let them rest until they are healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	"Regarding wounds and dislocations at the same time"
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When an injury comes with dislocation and it is wished to be restored, many times the patient dies: therefore, do not be presumptuous in its treatment unless you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful but not hasty; rather, at the beginning use soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands if there is no hope of healing. But when there is hope, then reset the limb to its place before the hot abscess arrives; and once the limb is in place, administer remedies for soothing heat, and treat the wound as it ought with drying ointments. And if there are fractures or crushed bones, set them and do what we have said for simple diseases. Guard against entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth more than your armor and body.
Amen	Amen
