O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh, my dearest son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its fulfillment, and I have brought it to an end through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came upon me to envision that I would complete it with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is much neglected in our region and has been entirely suppressed everywhere, the science has therefore perished and its strength lies only in the small descriptions found in books which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and the science is ignored.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Now it seems to me that I wish to revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the iron tools for cauterization, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And therefore, whoever engages in this must rise to the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the judgment of members, their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of joints, and how they move and remain at rest, and where their exit points are located.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hippocrates said that the name without work is worth little, but with work it is much; and likewise in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that anyone who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before should be careful lest they fall into error and kill people, as I have seen many times those who engage in this science without abandoning their ignorance and inexperience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut off one aposteme of scrofula from the neck of a woman and cut the arteries of her neck; so much blood came out that the woman fell dead between his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who removed a stone from the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; so he took away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for to remove it, and saw the condition of the sick man and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they tried to cut into him he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another doctor who took in charge one duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaking had a wound. And the doctor, full of ignorance, tied the break above the wound with straps so tight that he did not leave any calamine on the wound, and left him like that for one day. And he ordered that it should not be untied, and thus the leg became entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come unbind his leg; and when I untied it, he felt at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the corruption was already well established in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the member until the entire member was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who burst an inflamed aposteme and then set it on fire through the wickedness of his ignorance.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is free from melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you should know that the art of hands is divided into two parts: namely, work where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you guard yourself so that foolish doctors cannot speak ill of you. If you take up your weapons in haste and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way, then through God's grace you will come to salvation and be praised; and leave fearful diseases to those of harsh healing; and put away your weapons from those who cause you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the next in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on serious illnesses unless you wish to be called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicated cauteries. It is arranged from the head down to the feet. It discusses the shapes of instruments, the irons for cauteries, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, cupping glasses and wounds, extracting splinters, and similar things. It is arranged with the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter concerns restoring dislocations and distortions, as well as similar matters. It is arranged from the head to the feet with the shapes of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we begin discussing the work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality of each temperament and its benefit or harm.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of benefit and harm are lengthy discussions and subtle sciences, involving secret responses. Many wise men have spoken about this topic and agreed upon it. However, they allowed me few words because I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery universally benefits every temperament where it has material, except for two temperaments: the hot and dry without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	Regarding the hot and dry temperament with matter, some people argue that cautery is greatly beneficial there, while others claim the opposite, saying that cautery is not useful for illnesses caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat illnesses caused by heat or dryness. But those who argue otherwise say that cautery provides great benefit for hot and dry illnesses found in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body and moisture of man to the temperament of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And let no one meddle with this matter except those who have proven it and know well the chapter on cautery and the diversity of temperaments in men, as well as the dispositions, causes of their illnesses, seasons, and ages. We are not afraid for other temperaments, especially for cold and moist ones.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all physicians agreed upon the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know this, son: cautery along with fire is one of the secrets of cure and has greater benefit than cauterizing with burning medicines.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple and does not harm any other member if it is applied to the one being cauterized, except for those that are named otherwise.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Hot remedies pass from one member to another, causing serious illnesses in the limbs; but sometimes fire, due to its strength and virtue, does not act unless there is an excess of it.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and the length of service and study that I have devoted to this art, which is based on truth. Therefore, I apologize for the length of my words, as it does not please me to hide from you the secret contained in fire and its ability to overcome illnesses in bodies, as philosophers demonstrate; now receive these thoughts into your mind.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	"And know, son, that they agreed upon when cauteries ought to be performed, and chose priests."
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	"And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harm happening underneath is diminished with the aid of the cautery; and especially if cauteries are necessary for sudden and severe pains which cannot wait until greater injury comes to the limb."
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	"And do not think, dear son, as foolish physicians sometimes do; for the disease that is cured by cautery has no recurrence. They say so indeed; but it is not entirely true, because cauteries are medicines which change the complexion and dry up the humors causing pain, and they act more quickly than other medicines in their strength and power."
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	"And it is possible that sometimes the disease may come according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease itself in its power. The excess humors are collected there through consumption of foods and similar things except when cauteries are applied where there is little excess or moisture, such as those for toothache and similar ailments, and then such pain does not return; but this happens rarely."
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	"And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and indeed it is so; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth trying after medicines have failed, their intentions are mistaken, for when we have tried various remedies for a disease and they do not work, then we apply cauteries, and they are effective."
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	"So it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, but not according to the intentions of foolish physicians."
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	"The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more beneficial than those made of iron, and they said this only because of the quality and nobility of gold. They also said that the place where a cautery is applied does not cause corruption, but this is not true, as I have proven it myself; for in some people it does cause corruption. And yet, cauteries made of gold are more beneficial than those made of iron, just as they said."
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	"And besides, when you heat an instrument made of gold, you cannot tell exactly when it is hot because of the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly. And if it is heated too much, it melts in the fire, so there are many drawbacks to using them."
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	"And for these reasons we use iron cauteries that we have better adapted to our work."
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	"Now I have arranged this chapter from beginning to end so that it may be easier to find."
dou cautere olivaire	"about the olive cautery"
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	"This cautery is beneficial for moistness and coldness on the head, and there are two kinds of it that are made because of an illness called 'sodicity' and because of many humors descending from the head to the eyes and ears, and for excessive sleepiness, toothache, sore throat, and especially all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sciatica, apoplexy, and similar illnesses."
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	"The shape of this cautery is as follows: the patient should be purged with a soluble and moisturizing medicine for three nights or four, according to what the virtues and age and habits of the patient can tolerate. Then perform the cautery on the head of the patient."
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	"And then have the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, with their hands on their knees. Then place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their two eyes; where your middle fingers will meet is where you should make the incision, and then heat the cautery called 'olive,' which has this shape:"
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And place the cautery on the marked spot, and move it downwards and outwards little by little while turning your hand. Then lift your hand gently, and examine the area to see if you can see a small piece of bone; if not, continue with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you. Then take a little piece of wool, soften it in warm water, put it on a cotton pad, place it on the area, and leave it for three days. After that, apply a compress made of linen soaked in butter; leave it there until the inflammation has healed. Then treat the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmacon' until it is completely healed."
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	"And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges itself. And for this reason, it helps to leave it open longer."
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	"And some of these people say that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone and heal it."
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	"And others say that one should leave the cautery on until it burns down to the bone as large as a thread used by women for spinning, so that the humors can flow out more easily. Then one should leave the wound open for a long time before healing and dressing it."
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	"And these two methods of cauterization do not seem good to me in all respects, except perhaps in some cases where there is a need for fear. But I think that it is better to leave the cautery alone; because the flesh is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we can see in other members; and even when the flesh of the patient is naturally weak, the first indication of cauterization is more salutary and beneficial for me, and this is the method that I generally use."
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	"about chronic headache"
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	"If a patient has chronic pain in the whole head that lasts for a long time, they should use diuretics and pills called 'cochiae,' and remedies for purging the head, oils, and plasters. And if one applies the cautery I mentioned earlier, it will not be beneficial."
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	"Be careful if the patient's flesh is of strong nature and not too cold; in this case, you may cauterize them with the cautery that we mentioned earlier."
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	"Afterwards make the cautery on each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery at the point called 'vessels,' which is where cupping glasses are placed. And do not press your hand too hard so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak about it elsewhere. And the cauteries on the horns must be finer than those used for the middle of the head, and here is the shape:"
dou cautere dou chief	"about the cautery of the head"
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head,
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of medicine are such that you take one stalk of mallow, remove the skin and cut it into two pieces at the roots, then make a hole in the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can place the stalk of mallow beneath the skin; and when it has been placed so, tie it tightly and leave it thus for twelve hours; then untie it and draw out the stalk of mallow, leaving the wound thus for two or three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter until it comes out of its own accord.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointment until it is healed, and if you see that some burning medicines are needed, then refer to the twelfth treatise on burning medicines which I have written.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery should be applied in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron from which this shape is made:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a hook, with a little curve at its end and a small opening in the middle. It is placed on the painful spot and you hold your hand while slightly turning the iron so that half of the surface of the heart-shaped tip gets burned; then lift your hand so that the artery does not get burnt, which lies outside, and allow plenty of blood to flow out abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterward put cotton on wool and place it on the spot for three days; then I put moistened cotton in butter, and afterward heal the spot with ointment until it is clean; and if you wish to cauterize this ulcer with the cautery called 'cultellare', do so at its tip, being careful not to touch the artery in this ulcer which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of ulcer
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat an ulcer as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries mentioned earlier with medicine and iron do not suffice for it, then you must heat the cautery called 'cultellare' until it is white; and seize beforehand on the spot a line half the length of two fingers, and remove your hand once, ensuring that you do not touch the artery and that you do not reach the bone; and beware of the mandible which moves when chewing, and ensure that the nerve has no regard for the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the loss of blood from the artery when it is cut or when cutting causes great fear, especially to those who are not skilled and experienced; and leave the work in mid-course; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries are not sufficient for the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on the head as we have said, and heal the wound until it is clean; and if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	For pain in the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When cold pain comes to the ear, and one has opened there medications dissolving and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have made a full circle around the sick ear, or around the two if the pain is in both of them, and then move it away from the root of the ear where you have marked the location, and there are ten points around each ear; afterwards cure the place until it is clean.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Tortures that must be cured by cautery are only those that move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cauteries on those that come from scorching or inflammation of the nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you are curing this type of torture that moves with phlegm from hydres and purgations of the head and gargarisings, and these do not help, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the sick person with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little bit outside the temple, and the third in the meeting of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery against the head of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple just as long as a finger; and leave the cautery there until half of the kernel is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the likeness of the cautery that we have placed before, but it is a little more delicate and the knife must be a little thicker; afterwards cure the place as I have said before, until it is clean.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you are curing it as we have said, but it does not help, and the sick person does not have a fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the place that is called "vessels" as we have said before, and behind the cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and it should be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the sick person large syrups and mondifying pills for the brain; afterwards raise the head of the sick person all the way up, and place on the occiput the plaster of mustard that is written about in the treatise of plasters; and this is the manner of cauterizing: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is cured thus, good; and if it is not, make three cauteries in the middle of the head going down to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each cautery; and cure it as the others, and if you see that they are stuck together, and the sick person is suffering, then make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, make two others on the two horns, and cure until it is healthy; and let the cauteries be those called "olivary", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed with syrups and other things that we have said before; afterwards raise the head of the sick person, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the sick person is suffering, and the disease is severe, then make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until half of the kernel is burned, and lift your hand; afterwards cure until it is healthy, and let the cauteries be those called "olivary" that we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epilithic should only apply fire cautery to those who are phlegmatic. First, one must modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in previous sections when the patient is large and able to tolerate medical treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is a child who cannot tolerate this treatment, one should perform gargarisings and mastications to modify the brain frequently with good meats. Afterwards, one should raise the head in the middle and apply one cautery according to what we have said before, and one cautery on the vessel and each horn; and if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, one should apply cauteries as I have described for those with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, using olive oil according to the method I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, one should apply a single subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the excesses or corrupted moisture are caused by melancholy and produce thick phlegm, then apply as many cauteries as we have described for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the excess is inclined towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist due to melancholy, then give them something to drink that cleanses the brain according to what is written earlier in this section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, raise the head of the patient. Next, make one torch of well-woven linen in the shape of a circle and place it on the head. Have the patient sit crossed-legged and hold them tightly on all sides. Then present the liniment made with melted sheep's wool fat that has been warmed gradually over fire so that the patient can tolerate it when poured onto their forehead. Afterwards, remove the circle from inside the head and let it cool. Do this to the patient once a week along with other good treatments until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you wish to cauterize wounds by making several pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery increases moisture in the brain; then put cotton soaked in butter and chicken fat on top.
de l’awe des eulz	Here begins a chapter on the eye.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When it first comes to the eyes as described in the division by signs I've mentioned, then begin and give the patient something purifying the head, keeping away all moistures, and make them sweat or take many baths fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding him to raise his head, and make a cautery within the head, and make two cauteries upon the two temples if the descent of the eye is in two eyes together, or one if the descent is in one; and cut away all veins and arteries that are under the heart with the cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the breadth of the temple; and take care that there is no shedding of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incising the cautery how you should stop it; and sometimes one makes a cautery or incision under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	Regarding the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and customary and are upon the veins or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside, and it is seen that they are cold superfluities of phlegm, then make the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the eye descending into the eyes: one cautery within the head, and two cauteries upon the two temples, and two cauteries or incisions under the two bones behind; and if there is need for more, then cauterize gently above the eyebrow with many small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Regarding the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you have treated it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then let him drink three nights running of raw onions; afterwards raise his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the cautery called "olivary"; and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" upon the two eyebrows, a little below the eyebrows; and take care that you do not cut the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When paper made from oil is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the shape
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see fit, make two cauteries upon the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand there except until about a third of the paper is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Regarding the eyelashes that touch the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes are turned towards the inside and touch the eye, causing harm. In this case, one makes cauteries in two ways: either with fire or with a burning medication.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Where fire cauterization is ordered for the patient, let them keep their hairs long and even. If they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Once the hairs have grown and are even, then place the patient on their back. Next, draw a figure onto paper that is similar to the shape of the palm of your hand, with the beginning of the mark near the hairs; then put moist cotton in egg white and musk mallow on the eye, and then heat the cauterizing iron that has this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cauterize the drawn figure little by little many times until the skin is burnt there. The sign of the work's healthiness is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs lift at the point of the eye. Then remove your hand, and leave it like this for three days, after which put moist cotton in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards anoint it until it is sound.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come back, and the skin is softened, then begin the cauterization again on that same spot as you did at first. If the hairs are missing, cauterize it until the paper returns to its natural position, and becomes even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterizing iron for medical use is made by ordering the patient to let their hairs grow long and even. Then make a shape out of parchment like the leaf of a myrtle tree. Next, take three parts each of French soap and live wax, grind them well together, and do it quickly so that it does not cool. Then spread it onto the shape you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper over the eyes. If the disease is only in one eye, then work on one; if it is in both, then do both. Put moist cotton in egg yolk under the eye. Have the patient lie on their back, and place your two fingers on top of the medicine, pressing gently once or twice whenever the patient feels a biting sensation from the medicine, for they will feel a biting sensation like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine with your fingers.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the biting sensation has passed, then lift the eye-lid and see if you can raise the paper just as if it were lifted by heat or by cutting; and if it is thus, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply the medicine again on the eye where it has not opened until your efforts are equal and your eyes are at rest; then put cotton soaked in butter until the heat of the heart is extinguished, afterwards wash the eye with ointment called "diaphoresis" and others until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must guard your work carefully, so that no medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes moist and hairs prick in the eye, then restart the cautery on that softened area with clean paper, just as you did before; afterwards continue the treatment until it is healed; this is the form of the poultice for the wound:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this vary your constraints; and do not reply that which is right for you who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Here is the treatment for fistula by cauterization:
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in our divisions of diseases, but your treatment does not help,
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	"Instruct the patient to place their head in your hand; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or turn its head. Afterward, place damp cotton in egg white or in juice of parsley on the eye; afterward heat the cautery which is shaped thus: and it should be raised at the head like the form of a pigeon's feather, together with which should be the cautery; if you wish, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, it should also be like a tent; but nonetheless, this which is raised is useful for your work."
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	"Afterward press the fistula if it is open, and remove the pus from it, and dry it. And if it is closed, open it, and draw out the bowels. Afterward place the hot cautery on it, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the nail above the eye, so that your hand does not make a mistake; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and burn it."
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery down to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cautery once more, and if necessary, do so again, leaving it for three days; afterwards apply moist cotton in butter, and continue the treatment with a drying ointment until healed. If it is not healed after forty days, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is another manner of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand, make a fistula, then cut open its location. Afterward, insert cannula of fine copper here; this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	"And they make it to the quantity of three drops of lead; and hold your hand on the reed firmly, and do not let the patient move his head at all, so that the melted lead does not run into his eye; and it is necessary to place damp cotton in egg white or in wax on the eye of the sick person: the lead thus burns the place of the fistula, and heals it by wonderful healing."
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must administer a probe to the nose and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body of the nose.
des crevaices en levres	"for cracks in lips"
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on lips which are called "hairs", especially on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks which we have mentioned in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat up a small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly in those cracks until it reaches the bottom; afterwards, clean the area with wax until it is smooth.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the boil on the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When a boil comes on the root of the throat or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, and it becomes putrid and reddened and forms a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, but it does not improve: then it is necessary for you to have an cautery according to the size of the fistula. Then heat the cautery at the opening or hole of the fistula, holding your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it and the surrounding area; do this once or twice, then treat it as we have said in treatments until it is healed. And if it is healed thus, that's good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the rotted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	on the mobility of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums become softened by moisture and the teeth become mobile, and you treat it with medicines but they do not help, then place the head of the patient on your lap. Afterwards, heat the cautery which will be described below in this manner: place a tube over the tooth; put the hot cautery inside quickly, holding your hand until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth. Then remove your hand and recommence the cautery according to your desire. After that, have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water, keeping it in for an hour before spitting it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And thus the moving tooth is made firm, and the softened gum constrained, and corrupt moisture dried.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from coldness, whether it is hot or cold, and medical treatments are ineffective, then cautery should be used in two ways: cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is performed as follows: take some butter from a cow's udder and put it on the tip of an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the end of a needle, dip it into the melted butter, and quickly place it on the aching tooth, holding it until it cools. Repeat this often so that its effects reach the root of the tooth. If you see that the cotton and wool become cold and hard with the butter, then place them on the aching tooth and hold a hot iron near the cheek until the heat reaches the base of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cauteries together are such that you should take a copper or bronze probe, and make it thick so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth. After heating the cautery, of which the form will come later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, for the pain will be relieved the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, and then remove the heat; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	To perform cautery on any tooth you wish, according to your skill level, use this shape for the rod:
des scrophules	scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moistures, and is not responsive to digestion through medications, then use the cauterizing iron as described below, which has two openings for the smoke to exit from the other end; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, until it reaches the base of the abscess; if the abscess is small, use the cautery according to its size and leave it on for three days; afterwards, apply moistened cotton in butter until the scarring is healed; thereafter treat the area with ointments and dressings until it is clean.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cauterizing iron:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moistures prevail upon the channels of the lung, especially when it is due to cold complexion, then the patient should first be treated with dissolving medicines. Afterwards, perform cauterization at the root of the throat, taking care not to come near the throat itself and not to burn too deeply into the chest.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterward make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let it be a cautery called "clavile," as we have shown its form before; and heal the place until it is sound.
de la toust	Here's how you can translate "de la toux" into English:
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of the lung are of cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or heat, and the disease is chronic, then perform two cauteries on the chest in close places; and one other cautery within the breast between the breasts; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form that is mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cautery pricking all along the cautery called "poins," of which its form is shown here before, in the disease of the ears; and let there be about thirty points, or as many around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterward heal the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be of three rows according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, perform them in three places.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the displacement of the shoulder joint
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder blade is dislocated due to moisture and is put back in place but cannot remain there and returns and dislocates again with even a small movement, as we have experienced it, then you must first reduce the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards have the patient lie on their back and side; then lift the heart which is inside the titillite with the two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has 2 inches with this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces to the side, and let the figure of the cautery come together with four cauteries; and because this is done with the cautery that has 3 inches, therefore there are six cauteries for cauterization; and the nerves are according to the thinness of a thread, which is the form of the cautery that has 3 inches:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is joined onto this one nerve, so there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards put on the cautery that has been crushed with salt; afterwards have the patient rest, and do not move their limbs for a long time until they are well strengthened.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery clavile, or many cauteries pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is sound.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach so that they alter its nature, and catarrh is multiplied in it, and usual methods of treatment do not help, then the patient must be turned onto his back, extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this, make three fire cauteries: one below the armpit of the arm using the quantity of two fingers, for the entire cautery like a clove; and two cauteries in front of both sides such that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and there be enough space between one and another so they do not join together when they rot; and let the cauteries be so deep that they pierce both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without addition.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that it is necessary to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and whoever fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and pressing upon the stomach one point according to the quantity that you see fit; then cauterize for the entire cautery that is called "the point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment that we have discussed previously, let it be without wound.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver suffers pain from coldness and moisture and excess windiness, so much that it is greatly altered from its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is treated for this as we have said in sections, but it does not benefit him at all, then the patient must be sounded on his hypochondrium; and there are three cauteries to be applied according to this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondria, where the ribs of the man come together; and let there be the thickness of two fingers between each cautery; and let the cauteries be long-bodied, and do not press too hard with your hand throughout the cautery; and let only half of the chest be burned, and let the patient stand upright on his feet; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms; this is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if it is your wish, then cauterize these cauteries with the scalpel if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn all of the chest, for you would dry out the whole body; and do not let it come near the belly, for the heart is very subtle there, and especially so regarding this.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess on the liver,
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment fails the physicians, so it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back; and then press firmly upon the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a razor, of which here is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the cautery until the flesh is burned, and come up to the syphilis, until the pores are all open; after that treat according to the cure of the bones until it is healed; and it is not necessary that anyone but one who has studied medicine for a long time use this cautery, by whom many times these diseases have been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can boldly act, nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Regarding the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must perform cauteries for pleurisy with the roots of aristologia in this manner: take a root of aristologia that is long and as large as you can find, and let it be dry and also thick and long like your two fingers; and moisten it in oil, and heat it on the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the navel and the neck, and 2 small cauteries a little bit lower down in the part that is below the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning backwards a little bit; and one cautery inside the breast, and another on top of the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and 2 on each side of the breast away from the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand too hard, but rather do it openly as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient authors said that some people used a fire cautery resembling a razor, heated it and placed it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; and if pain occurs, as we have said in the case of the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Regarding the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse with the methods that we have said in the chapter on treatments, and it does not help, then there are three ways of cautery which are all good:
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Among these, there is a manner such that you make three or four cauteries, aligning them according to the length of the mouse, following the shape of the liver cautery we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand throughout the entire cautery, and let the patient always lie on his back. And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two edges, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is near the mouse, where the ribs of the patient come towards the left, and let the elevations by which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Afterwards, insert the two heated edges until the heart is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and so there will be four. And if you wish, cauterize with the entire cautery having three edges.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has thrown off corruption for a long time, it is better than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery should not be used on someone with dropsy except in the manner called "ascites.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	If you treat according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions and your treatment does not help, then you must perform four cauteries around the belly button, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the navel, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and let the cauteries be close to the heart's heat.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, leave the cautery on for a long time to throw off corruption, and do not neglect the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and recovery will hasten, and both intentions will come together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the one that we have shown earlier, which is like a key; and those for the back are olive-shaped, according to what has been shown before.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in someone with dropsy and filled with yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go too deep in by force, lest you spill out the yellow water, and let the cautery be according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the calf muscle; and let the cautery be long, one in front of the knee and the other behind it, on the inside of the thigh. Leave the cauteries on for a long time without treating them until the water goes out; afterwards treat with the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	Of epilepsy
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When an intestinal disorder comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be treated by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great strength, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been mentioned earlier about the cautery of the stomach, around the belly button. And four small cauteries around the throat, each like a small key cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture abounding and the patient suffering greatly, then make one cautery on the point of the chin, one cautery on each ear, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one; for treatment is helpful when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are at the fundament, one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, then apply cauteries: III on the spine of the back, that which is entirely deflected downwards just below the shoulder blade here and there in a triangular manner; and one cautery under each buttock; and if you think his stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the face swell up, then apply one large cautery to the stomach as it is said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cauteries made in a clave shape; and let the cautery remain on for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating it, heal it until it is clean.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of the fleshy growth called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut off a veinlet, heat the cautery that appears like a razor, then place it completely aflame on that cut vein; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein where blood flows. Do this once or twice; if there is much veinlet, cauterize each one as we have said; afterward, treat with beneficial ointments until they are sound; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on an artery, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	Of poorly-treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	If the patient cannot endure incision or opening, which we will discuss in its proper place, then there comes such a disease that can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes to someone and it is inflamed and emits corruption and corrupt moistures, you should prove it with a thin probe entirely throughout its length, and make sure that you know the entire length of the probe.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to how much the disease has entered there, and resume using the cautery until those corrupt and rotted bodies are burnt once, or twice or thrice, depending on what is necessary; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are within, nor the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, then be careful with these places, and only perform this procedure in a thick flesh area where it is not permanent; afterwards, treat the place until it is clean, and if the place is scaled over and the materials have been removed for a long time, then know that the place is entirely healthy. But if the materials are not removed, know that the place is corrupted, and the bone at the front is rotted. And thus, as one of these which we will mention in its place.
de la maladie des reins	de la maladie dels rengs (Occitan)
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the kidneys and from gross winds, and it does not take on the nature of a woman's menses, then you must perform cautery on the kidneys on both sides with the clavicle cautery that we have mentioned earlier; and if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauteries in a row, and this will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and cold due to moisture so that the patient retains urine, then perform cautery on the front of the bladder where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, each cautery being as long as a hazelnut; and also perform one cautery behind the back if needed, or two if necessary; and use the clavicle cautery according to the shape described earlier.
de la marris	Of the womb
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist and does not allow conception due to this, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they do come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauteries around the navel, as we have said for the bladder cautery, and two cauteries behind the back; and use the clavicle cautery, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hair
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moistures descend to the hair socket and cause it to move from its place, and the sign is that one thigh appears longer than the other when measured together, and the parting of the hair is found empty; then you must perform cautery on the patient above the hair socket with a circular cautery, encircling the socket as it turns so that the socket is within the circle; and use cauteries similar to those used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not available, then perform three large olive-shaped cauteries and let them be as deep as all the others; and do this until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of pain in the hair
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain occurs in the hip joint, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated for this as we have discussed previously but the treatment is ineffective, and the condition is chronic: then you must purge the patient of thick humors using foul-tasting pills or similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterward he performs cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two ways: that is to know together burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is such: that you cauterize upon the bone of the thigh three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them deep and large, and have between each cautery the size of two fingers, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle upon the top of the thigh, therefore there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish to perform cautery with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the case of hip joint dislocation, do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip joint, and all the fat around the bone is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner that is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh and does not reach to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says they feel pain, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers away on the left side; and let the cauteries be scalpel-shaped, and burn the thickness of a finger; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or near them, cauterize where they feel it three points or four at the cautery called "point".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, then make more cauteries; and if the pain is felt below the knee towards the thigh, perform a scalpel-shaped or circular cautery there. Be sure in all your cauteries that you do not let the cautery burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who performed a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot likewise, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach remedy that caused death
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, perform a cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise say regarding the cautery of the haunch, this is the manner: make one such iron and let it be at the head as thick as a hazelnut or a little less, and let it be forked and let there be between each fork the quantity of a barleycorn in length; and let the forks be on both sides, and let them also be like nuts, and let there be one handle of well-made iron; this is the form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	**And let it be heated until it is all red and gleaming hot, then place it on the bad boil, turned towards the sound side; cauterize once with one cautery, leave it three days; afterwards make an emplaster of butter, leave the wound open for a long time; thereafter cure with ointment until it is healed.**
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	**Albucasis says that we use this cautery little for fear of its burning, and few people use it; yet this is one of the good cauteries, which can bear it well.**
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of medicine is that you make one forked instrument in which the margin descends, and let it be long on one side, made of brass or iron, and have two nuts at the top, each with the quantity of a hazelnut between them; and let them be overtly open and above, and join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After, place the box of hot coals on the patient lying on his sick side, and then press your hand firmly on the box; next, insert between the two circles of hot iron which has been heated in the fire one handful, and let it remain for an hour's time, while the patient endures the heat and burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it finds there biting like fire; and when the biting has passed, then raise your hand with the tool and lift off the box of hot iron, leaving it for three days. Then put butter on until that which is black from the burn is removed; and let it remain for three more days so that corruption may be drawn out; and this would be the final aid after treatment with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make one tool that draws iron according to what you have done with the box, increasing it in size. And this is the manner of hot iron, and I have written it in the treatise on medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and live lime, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And put over that pot another well-sealed pot, and place on it sweet water so that there is twice the amount of liquid as the powders when you are able to grasp them easily with your hand; let it sit thus until watery liquor drips down into the sealed pot, then take all that water and pour it onto lime and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very hot and can be administered in many medical works and fire cauteries for other limbs. For it performs the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hair well, such as tincture of myrrh and honey of anacardium and lime with soap, all mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where a man was healed from the pain of his hair and sciatic vein, and he praised it greatly, saying that no other treatment was used, and he was healed at once when this cure was performed, as told hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in such a manner that you take some green and dry verdigris, grind it much with the powder of fat, and place it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain resides, and leave it; and let it stay for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter a bath until his body is a little warmed up, and lay him in bed, and the pain will all go away and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such cauteries except after evacuating blood from the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it helps much; and the cauteries should be made in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen, grease it with old oil, and place it on the depression between the big toe of the foot and the one called the 'fossicle'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After this, take dry goat hair and heat it in fire until it becomes charred, then place it on the wool and let it stay until it is extinguished; repeat this again, and do not stop doing so until you sense that it reaches the bone and the pain has ceased. This method of cautery is called "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	**of the pain in the back**
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or impact or excessive bleeding, or from similar matter spread coldly, in none of these cases does fire cautery help except for that which comes from the infusing of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that after the patient has been purged with fetid pills or others similar ones, three lines of incisions be made on their back where the pain is felt, and five cauteries or more be applied in each line according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cautery be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauteries at the middle clavicle bone according to this shape:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often occurs in young children, and the sign of its onset is that they have difficulty breathing when lying down and are afraid; and you find on the back spine and on both sides the appearance that comes up over the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to cure it, cauterize with the cautery of a cell according to this shape:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cauterizing iron grips evenly each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish to do so, cauterize around the spine at intervals of two or three lines, with the points close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Then cleanse the wound until it is sound according to what we have said, and make sure you do not apply cautery in a place where there is an abscess near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	de la dolor des jointes
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is caused by moistures that are spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes to the foot, which doctors properly call "podagra," and when it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured by medicines, it is treated by cauterization in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olivary according to this shape:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to prick the surface of the foot, perform cautery with the cautery called "the point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains reach to the knees and other joints, which happens often, then make cauteries on each knee, three cauteries or four on each part, with olive oil for all cauteries; and if you need more, do so, but do not exceed your hand until the brand of the heart's spear is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then make two punctures around the wrist; and if there remains no pain on the arms, then make punctures on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains reach to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and ensure good care for the patient and administer medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	But if you provide good care and purge phlegm, it will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	"Treatment for a broken nose:"
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	"When cutting comes in angles, and the intestines descend to the thighs and it is newly happened, so that when you see him cure it, he should not eat that day; and let him use things that leave the stomach empty, so that the wind descends from his stomach; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his elbow until the intestines are repaired, and stretch out the sinews to your two fingers, and seize with a pinch below the cut over the bone of the finger, and at one sign which should resemble half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery of which this is the shape:"
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it is white and casts shadows
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bowels to their place; and the assistant should keep his hand on them so they do not slip back; and open the patient's thighs well, and put a cushion and a servant under each thigh, and another under the chest where you will hold your hands; then place the cautery on the sign until your whole hand reaches the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bowel does not slip out while you are performing the cautery; so as not to burn it; and so that because of this the patient does not die or suffer some other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauteries for children should be thin according to their size, and for large people they should also be large according to their measure; afterwards, on the third day, dress the place of the burn with butter until the blister is removed; then dress it with other ointments until it is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and his food should be restricted for a long time so that the bowels do not move when he goes to relieve himself.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he wishes to rise, let him be given a well-made sling, and use it for another 40 days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against excessive drinking and eating, and loud laughing; and when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall tell hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	"de la routure du ventre"
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When fistulas come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, perform the fire cautery according to its size, and burn one third of the heart; afterward treat according to what we have said; and some ancients have said it should be cauterized at three angles like this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the beginning of the fistula and draw a line along its width above the fistula, and another below it, and then carefully perform the cautery incision.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of past pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, either from falling or being struck, and that pain lasts a long time, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called 'point', and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, power, location, and twistings, and the severity of the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is without pain from the first cautery, that's good; but if not, begin another cautery on top of it, for it is customary for the cautery to move towards the limb where it is closest, therefore you must continue the cauteries until the patient is free from pain.
de meselerie	Of bonesetting
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Some people are helped sometimes by cautery with great benefit, especially those illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see a patient to cauterize their eye, be careful if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not go down or remain, and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the entire body, then make three cauteries on top of the head: one among the eyebrows, another towards the forehead at the end of them; two on each horn, and one behind on the occiput; and let your hand be so placed that the cautery reaches the bone, and until the skin blisters come out so that the vapors of thick humors can escape from there; and cauterize it on the mouse according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the bonesetting is spread out everywhere and it clearly appears, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said on top of the head, and one on the nape of the neck, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the ribcage and another near it, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are located on the back of the calf; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more cauterizations you perform, the more help you give, and greater benefit you bring; and know that patients do not feel pain from cauterization as much as healthy people do, because their body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find them in the various ways of using irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating the place with flour of doves' feathers mixed with honey, continue treatment until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but is not healed, then apply cauteries to the limb according to its size and thickness. Let the cautery be a little bit deep into the flesh near the heart; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cauteries are applied to the hand and foot and back at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if the swelling is removed. Nevertheless, no one should meddle with this unless they know about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	"of Albarus"
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"When the disease called 'albaras' has begun and medical remedies are of no avail, then cauterize it with a slightly penetrating cautery according to the amount of flesh around the heart until the whiteness is removed and its color changes. Then treat it with flour of vetch and lentils mixed with rose oil, plantain leaves, pigeon's blood, and almond milk, each in equal parts; mix everything together, tie it up in a cloth, and apply it to the affected area until it heals."
li cure de chancre par cautere	"Treatment of Chancres by Cautery"
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a cancer begins, and you see it halt, then cauterize it with a fire cautery that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And moreover the wise ones say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the cancer; but this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen before. It is more advisable that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called 'circule', as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of swelling that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it lingers due to its excessiveness or the weak condition of the patient being elderly, or because there is too much blood or time spent, and you see it worsening: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries pricking; afterward leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see that it is piercing all the way through the cautery, then heat the cautery which has this shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand on the middle of that illness called 'adubelati' until the cautery pierces the heart, and make the cautery such that the patient feels drawn towards it in such a way that the course of corruption is eased.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, until he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the treatment of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness there is called 'corrodens', which is nothing other than the consumption of limbs, for it consumes them just as fire consumes dry logs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand a cautery of fire together, then heat the cauteries, small and large according to what is needed for the place where the disease is; afterward cauterize it from all sides until you reach all corruption, and let nothing remain of it, so that everything that is corrupted may be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for 3 days, and put on the cauterized places a poultice with oil until the burns of the fire are removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of hot fomentations
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see that new flesh does not appear, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted flesh.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this wound has sometimes been cured with a hot medicine instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already mentioned the cure for hot medicine in its place. Take what you need of it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often, at the feet, a disease called "clos" arises, which is a large, broken thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 namely, fire cautery and cautery with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is done by heating a hot iron like a blacksmith's hammer, made of good iron to the size that it can surround the nail on all sides and has sharp edges. Then place it hot on the nail and move your hand around the nail until you reach the tip of the nail; leave it thus for three days until it begins to produce pus. Then make a poultice of wild mallow leaves crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the place with ointment around the flesh until it is clean.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they turn away from the body and happen many times in hands and feet, then you must bring cautery of hot water to it; and this is done in such way: take a cane of brass or iron, or a goose feather, and put on the nail and its head, that is to say warts. And put the cane around so that it encompasses all about, then put some hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and can find a deep path for the hot water even to the root; and let the patient endure the biting of the hot water for an hour. Then leave it thus, and it will deroot itself entirely with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you remove all those that are on the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone is trembling from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other [cause], you must perform four cauteries on them: two between each spine on the back, one at the foot, and one on the stomach near the navel. This will cause the trembling to cease and their health to be restored from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	For pus-filled pustules that smell bad
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No part of the body appears more often to emit stinking pustules than those coming from corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	Therefore, when they first appear, it is necessary to perform a cautery on each head of the pustule: either a fine probe made of myrtle wood, whose point has been heated in fire, or long root of aloe, or with a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And some are cauterized at the beginning when they appear in this manner; thus, they cannot grow any further but rather the excess from which they arise is dispersed and they become clean. However, it must be done after evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from without, or at the incision of the boil, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very difficult to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, so you should quickly put your two index fingers on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is pacified beneath your fingers, and that no drop comes out; then put on fire several olive cauteries both small and large until they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your fingers, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, so take quickly another one of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well stopped, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tying with a strong thread, or by medicines put on that have power to stop bleeding; and let it be tied and tightened appropriately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Which will bring about stopping of bleeding is tying very tightly with rags or putting hot things on top, or similar things, if it profits little or not at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a doctor or medicine present, so he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press very hard until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein; and do not move your finger, but moisten it with cold water often that it be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped; and then do afterwards what is necessary with cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the surgeries of wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all the diseases where it is necessary to cauterize with fire or with burning medicine, and the cauteries, their causes and instruments and forms; and I have put that chapter at the beginning down to the feet, and I will go in this chapter by the same way so that one can find more easily what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And before I begin this one, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one about cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there are many times evacuations of blood when opening the vein and cutting on an aposteme and in treating wounds and extracting splinters and cutting on stone, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many people die from it.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt anything foolish.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many people come seeking treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	Yet there are those who are so enamored with their illness that they die quickly because of their foolishness regarding their disease and the severity of their condition. One should fear for such people.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give their interpretation, saying: "Wait, I am healed"; but the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	Do not consent to those who come to you with such an attitude, but place greater trust in your honor than in your greed. Do not recklessly open yourself to anyone, but only to those whom you are certain of and whose help could bring you renown and praise. Use prognosis and indication in treating your patients so that their health may be restored. This will aid you in gaining good reputation, glory, and the memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	"Dear son, May Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if it pleases Him to inspire you with the holy breath of His hand, Amen."
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	"I have arranged this chapter in sections for you to consider, according to what is before the chapter on cupping, which I have outlined from beginning to end, so that you may find more easily what you will need."
dou chief plein d’aigue	"full head of water"
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the mother holds the child's head too tightly; sometimes it happens due to some unknown cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness outside of children, and in all those that I saw the bite healed quickly; therefore it seems to me that it is best to leave such cures alone.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the swelling increased each day so that it could not be supported; and the moisture became so great that it burst, and this moisture collected beneath the bone above the spine, between the heart and the bone; and the operation is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the swellings are small, you should cut a gash in the head, wide enough; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture may run out. And here is the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture has grown more and the swelling is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see signs that the angles of the head are raised on each side, and water flows out when you press it with your hand from within, and this has not been answered: then you must make three incisions in the head according to this manner
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	After incision, remove all moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After applying cloth strips and powders, mix wine and oil together and let it sit for five days. Then remove the dressing and treat the wound with compresses and ointments, keeping the head bandaged and giving the patient dry food with little moisture until the limb is healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another manner of incision is that you observe where the swelling of the aposteme and the gathering of water appear; for sometimes it appears before, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut where the aposteme appears and the gathering of water, and make the incision according to what you can manage; but be careful not to cut an artery; for if it bleeds, then the sick person dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	de reume
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "catarrach" in the ears or the nostril, and the disease is chronic, and treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort is to use cauterization along with cutting the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, therefore, when you cover the eyes that the patient should turn his head backwards; afterwards, rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then let the patient stretch out his neck with both hands on the cloth; then observe where the vein was broken and the places of one and the other are behind the ears, and they are lying down; then mark the places with ink, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula into two parts until the incision reaches the bone, and this should be done at the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting also like two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then blood flows out continuously upward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the arteries do not appear to touch, then you must measure the quantity of space of three fingers wide, then mark with ink and cut until it reaches the bone; and the amount of blood that needs to be let out is six ounces, and sometimes a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure and the fullness of the artery. Then examine the wound: if it remains on the bone point of the hip, then cut off any protruding abscesses, then squeeze the wound closed and bandage it with dressing until it is healed.
de emigrainne	de emigrainne
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When chronic migraine comes with severe catarrh and moisture from tears, and heat in the temples, along with long-standing madness and similar things, and even though medical treatments are used, none of them help, then cut the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the sick person leans back their head and observes the artery that appears in the temple, for it beats visibly, but may be less so in some people who are too cold. And if it is hidden, then the sick person wraps their neck with several cloths; then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and rinses the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly. Then take the spatula which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly peel the skin until you reach the artery, then grasp it with forceps and carefully separate it from the surrounding tissues on both sides; if the artery is thin, use the point of a nail clipper to cut it, then sever that part according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it is not severed, blood will not flow freely throughout.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	"And draw six ounces of blood, up to three. And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread, so that putrefaction does not come before the wound closes, and there are no bloody discharges; then cut away the excess that is between the two ties at this very moment, and then, if you wish, cauterize with the cutting cautery up to the bone until the head is severed. And this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and is of hot complexion."
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery helps to finish off moisture: therefore it is more helpful for dampness.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary that one fill the place with old cotton and put on well-made dressings; and when they are untied, care should be taken to cure them with dry medicines which cause flesh to grow, and dressings, until they heal. And if blood flows from the artery every time you work there, then hurry to cauterize with the cutting cautery, or fill the place with vitriol and press it with your hand so that the blood stops flowing; and if this is not present, then put your thumb on the place until the blood congeals, and wash the place with cold water until the blood ceases, and constrain it as necessary. And what is masterful and easier for extracting an artery is to cauterize the vein of this cutting cautery in two places, but let the cuts be well spaced to preserve their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the material is too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there must be one inch of space between the two knives, and then when you have marked with a hot iron on both places, and you measure the glowing iron so that it comes up to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let them be distant between the two cuts because this cautery is not continuous throughout. And this is the form of the cautery.
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears flow from the veins that are above the forehead of a fever patient, and there is no profit from any medicine applied there, and you see the face of the sick person reddening, and feel on the forehead a trembling as if from shivering; and if the eyebrows are thin and moist so that the hairs of the paper (eyelids) fall out, and the eyelids are heated and burned by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called this ancient remedy "cure contuse," and it involves making three incisions on the forehead of a patient with this disease: one down the middle of the forehead, from the eyebrows to the nose, and two others along the temples above the ears, being careful not to cut any arteries located there; keep your hand away from the line of the jawbones, and make each incision about three fingers wide. Then take a piece of sponge and many cloths to wipe away blood, and use the spatula shaped like this:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is drawn from the temple to the second incision; and scrape away all the heart that is between the two slits up to the soft tissue that is on the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spongy material.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert the tool called "cultellarium" into the first slit, it is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other side. This is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the thin blade towards the flesh near the heart, and the blunt blade towards the bone, and press until it reaches the middle fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels descending from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to where the heart opens, and then do the same in the middle fissure up to the other end; and then extract blood evenly, and press the area for blood collection; then place a bandage of old cotton in each fissure, and cover with warm cloths soaked in wine and oil and rosewater, ensuring no abscesses form; and on the third day remove the ligature, and apply abundant cold water dressing, followed by basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	This is an extract from "Le Grand Chirurgie" by Guy de Chauliac
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	If it happens that catarrh comes on suddenly, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weakening of sight, and burned papers, and hair falling out, and there is deep pain in the head, and the sick person sneezes; then know by these signs that those matters and that catarrh come from many veins, and the cure for it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And have the patient lie on their back, then make a long incision down the middle of the forehead, and another across its width.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the crevice of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves near the temples that move during chewing; and when the bone is exposed, then suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then open between the two lips of the wound and put in old cotton and linen strips; then tie above it cloths dampened in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscesses; once they are removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents that cause flesh to contract.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flour and 4 parts of colophony, and make a plaster out of it. And apply it to these wounds to encourage flesh growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Chapter: "The Stopping of the Ears"
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things:
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When something like a stone falls into the ear or in some other manner that does not fit with the ear and does not grow within it, then place the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then distill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then bring about extraction; and when you sneeze with condimentum, and hold the nostrils closed when sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; then stretch the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Fire cautery is often applied with this remedy; if it does not come to fire, then help should be sought through the use of subtle forceps. Here follows its form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with tweezers, that's good. If not, then extract with a fine, small hook; and if it does not come out with this, make a reed of straw and stick the end of the reed into the earhole hard, and stop what is around the reed with soft wax so that wind cannot enter with the reed; then blow fire strongly, for often fire comes thus as we have said; and if it does not come from fire in such manner, take glutinous substance which birds use, and put some of it on an instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glut on the stone or whatever thing it may be, and blow fire.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear before inflammation and spasm comes, and the manner of cutting is thus: first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein according to his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small crescent-shaped incision in the root of the ear where it hangs; and let the incision be as large as you can get to the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and continue the treatment until he is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer one thin, subtle spatula according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And help incise that boil.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this if you think that the boil is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many incisions. Then extract it with subtle forceps and suck out the pus, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, in the case of water entering the ear, the patient should first sneeze forcefully and plug the ear with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie down on the same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it flows out by itself, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it does not [flow out], then take many pins according to the length of your thin fingers and light ones, and heat them slightly in fire. And have the patient insert one or two into their earhole, and stick it through on the other side with another pin; and keep doing this from pin to pin until all the water flows out, like this it will all flow out. If you see [the water], then take a straw, and put one end in the ear, and hold the other end over fire until the end of the straw is burnt. Then repeat with other straws until all the water flows out, as we have said earlier.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	"For the removal of the animal, if it is small-bodied like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division. But if it is large-bodied and can be felt, bring tweezers for its removal; this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear."
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	"For the removal of earthworms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the chapter on distillations, and if the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear in sunlight: if any worms are visible, remove them with fine tweezers; but if they are not visible, take the tube made of this shape:"
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Place the most subtle head in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck strongly on the whole cane; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey coming out, stop up around the cane with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out easily as we have said, administer distillations which the ancients have proved in the killing of worms, and you will find them treated in the writings on distillations; and thus distil your oils and medicines into the ear through all this instrument, of which here is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	"And let it be made of silver or thin brass with a small hole below and wide above for distillation. And for pressing inside the distillation, use an instrument well-made for this purpose. And if you wish to take one razor and wrap cotton around its tip carefully; then pour your oil or juice into the tube along with whatever medicine you desire, and place the tube in the ear. Then insert the razor with all the cotton into the ear and press gently with your hand until the oil is distilled into the ear. And warm the patient's ear beforehand, and let the distillation be done in a small pot warmed over the fire before being distilled into the ear; and make sure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not then be as effective."
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Chapter: "The Stopping of the Ears"
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in their ears; and the same applies to adults due to injury or flesh grown inside the ear, which sometimes goes deep into the ear so that it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is one little opening that can be clearly seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, that which comes deep inside so that it cannot be seen is difficult to treat in many cases. And in the case where there is an opening visible, you should place the patient's ear towards the sun and look inside: if you see any polyp appearing, then perform the operation described below:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	"And let it be sharp and cutting both before and behind, full, so that it does not wound the ear; if the prolapse is of flesh born in the body of the ear, hold it with fine forceps and cut it lightly, until all that flesh is removed."
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operations are deeply embedded in the ear, then take a light and fine razor and heat it slightly on the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the operation where the patient feels pain in the ear, pierce gently, and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear; then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Continue this process for several days until the wound is healed. Then take a gauze and moisten it in rose water, powdered vitriol, and apply it. If you see swelling of the ear, then remove the gauze and replace it with another gauze moistened in cerote made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling has gone down; then cure it until it is healed."
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	"And if there is discharge of blood, take a sponge and wring it out in cold water, then place it on the ear. Use other remedies that stop the discharge of blood, which are found in treatises on distillations."
de la char des papieres	"What is written on the paper"
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	"This is the remedy that comes from paper of the eyes when they are moist and dried out. It is necessary to stretch them with tweezers and forceps, then cut it with a scalpel at its roots; then apply powdered vitriol."
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	"And if a thread of blood oozes out, then cauterize it with a lenticular cautery and cut it afterwards. This is more effective than cauterizing first. And often repeat this process until there is nothing left of its roots; for when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not grow back."
de la gresle	"Hailstorm"
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, hailstones come onto papers that appear like hail in shape and hardness, and therefore this disease is called "hail," which is a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below. Its treatment is as follows: be aware if the hail moves from one side to another; it's easy to know; then make an incision wide, gently scrape each part, then grasp it with forceps, and cut it off.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cut it without slightly piercing the paper, it does not harm the patient. If the tear is large, gather it with a stitch and heal it until it is sound; if it is small, do not use force, for the ointment will restore it soon and form new flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	"And if the hail is descending into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper over, and grasp the hail with tweezers and cut it on both sides; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it does not matter; and when the hail has been cut, rinse the wound with salt water, and heal it inwardly until the patient is healthy."
de la graisse des eulz	Here's a possible translation for "de la graisse des eulz":
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that enters the tissues of the papers above, which happens more in children than in adults. It greatly harms their eyes and causes them to have catarrh in the mornings, so they cannot look at the sunlight because tears rush into their eyes. Because of this, they often lie on their faces and sleep with their papers below their eyelashes moistened by the swelling and appearance covered with exinach that opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press hard with your two hands and feel the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of removing it is as follows: the patient puts his head in your hand; then takes one linen cloth and prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains eosinach from each part, then places it on top; and presses with his fingers on both sides so that the eosinach is gathered within the circle; then makes in the middle of the moistness with the sharp spatula a cut as wide as the wound made when bloodletting, and cuts the skin deeply until you reach the eosinach; and in several positions comes out eosinach from the cut, resembling the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take out with one piece of lint gripped between your fingers behind, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and make sure that you do not stuff in the cut, but wipe all the spatula up to the eye without cutting or hurting it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if eosinach does not come out at the beginning of the cut, then gently widen the cut a little until it appears; then remove it as we have said above, then moisten cloths in hot water and cold water, and place them on the wound, and press with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are some men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him until he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess forms, then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	hairs from the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs appear on the papers mixed with others than their natural ones and are entwined, they harm the eyes and cause diseases such as habitual tears, softening of the papers, and albugine, to such an extent that it causes destruction of the eyes. And there are four ways to treat it: either by cauterization with fire together or by hot medicine according to what is before or after cautery, and it can be done either by incision and suturing or by tweezers, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must put the patient's head in your hand, then turn the paper from the eye with your left hand; if it is folded over, that is good; if not, then insert a needle with one thread on top. And whether it is near the edge of the paper or where the hairs are growing near those hairs, and pull one thread upwards along the entire length of the paper, and turn it towards the razor; then make an incision underneath the paper, below the hairs attached, with the spatula cutting from the large pupil to the small one. Then remove one thread, and place a small tent made of cotton and cloth under the paper, then press on the paper in the shape of a cone, like a mortar pestle, and nevertheless it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity that you see lifting up the paper which is divided into two parts.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is need to cut a large quantity of paper according to how the paper has been softened; then make two lines on either side of where you have drawn with ink, and begin from the large artery up to the small one; and let one of the incisions be close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the angles of the heart, then cut through all; then bring together the two lips with a stitch of thread made of fine wool, and absorb the blood, and cover the excess threads over both eyebrows with any sticky substance if you see fit to do so; and if not, pay no heed to it, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitching with dry and constricting substances, because the paper relieves at the joining of the wound and its gathering together, but the stitch is harmful (as the ancients said), and this is done without fear; and there is another method: and it is that you draw a figure on the paper similar to the shape of a laurel leaf as we have described, with three incisions made according to the shape that follows:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	"Then cut that which is above the small forces equally according to the shape shown below:"
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you lack power to hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with thread, and insert it into the figure; and place another thread beside the large artery, and the second thread beside the small one, and bring them together evenly between your two fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have cut, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar softening ointments; and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are turned: thus you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artistic.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	"The treatment of the canals is as follows: Convert the paper and make the slit within it according to what I have said, then make two fine canals by art equal in length to that of the paper and the width of the spatula; cut at both ends where you hold the threads. Then join one thread evenly onto that which lies above the paper of the eye, and strain both canals tightly from both parts; leave it thus for several days, and the skin that is strained will harden, darken, and shrivel until it adheres."
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, cut it with some force, then care for it until it is healed; and when the wound has healed, and the paper has been lifted off, and the hairs will no longer prick; and this is the shape of the two canals that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	"The operation is as follows: Take a fine needle and thread it with one thin, soft silk thread; then join the ends and tie them evenly, making the length of the threads a palm's breadth. Then take another short, fine silk thread and tie its end to the threads; then the patient should place his head in your hand, and be near the sun so that the operation may be clearly seen, for it is a delicate and subtle one. Then insert the needle throughout the canal into the root of the hair, joining it, and pierce it quickly through the paper until you draw it out above the natural hair; then pull the hair up to the canal, and place it in the canal if there are one or two or three or more hairs; then withdraw your hand so that all the hairs come out of the canal into the paper with the natural hair."
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	"And if the canal is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the canal downward along all the thread that you have ordered, until the canal comes out of the hole above and you can see it through the vision of the eye; then pull out the canal and the thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair settles in its place and flesh grows over it. And if the hairs are small, accompany them with a long natural eyebrow hair, and raise it with that one which you leave, until it is separated and then lift it."
de la porriture de l’oil	"Treatment of eye inflammation"
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness called "aleacrati" occurs in the eye where corruption is present, there are two kinds of it: one natural, and another unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting or cauterizing, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of treating it is that you cut through that scar, and separate the lips of it, and place linen wicks inside, and let it remain until it is healed; and it is not necessary to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but there are things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and rose water or white honey and linseed should be cooked, and ointments of diacylon melted in one of the oils, and wrapped in a wick, for its treatment.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you should take care that it does not heal in its former shape; and these works that we have mentioned serve only to prevent this illness from returning in its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness that is underneath, which is truly called "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	An accident happens from wounding and cutting and cauterizing and similar things. The way of the operation in it is that you take a needle, on which there is doubled thread, and stick it into the flesh, making it pierce from the left eye to the right eye, so that the threads come out through two holes in the flesh; then stretch the flesh above the whole needle, and cut with one broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper comes back according to how it should be, that's good. But if not, then take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts on either side within the paper; let the openings of the two cuts be at both angles of the incision you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are brought together, the figure is like the figure of a letter called "I Greek"; then remove that flesh according to how much its sides are beside it from what supports the paper, then join the two disjoined parts with a thread of wool; then follow the care that we have said about softening medicines and dressings until it's healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from cut or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make one full cut underneath the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said before; then separate between the two leaves of a bandage, as I have said; and one should do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters arrange various devices with all their power to make the figure return to its natural shape; and the sick person himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soldering occurs in many men in such a way that the paper above is stuck with egg white, and cannot move nor perform its natural tasks, then you must insert the point of a razor below the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with forceps until you cut what is attached to the spatula's tip, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient can bear it if the spatula is too sharp or cuts the eye; and let your incision, from which you scrape off this assembly, be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and all of this assembly is healed, and sometimes they make in the eye salted water, and lift it with fresh water and collyrium; then place a linen bandage between the paper and the eye, and put wet wool moistened in egg yolk on top of the eye; and after the third day use collyrium and compresses until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the angle of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the angle is of two kinds: one is nervous and resembles a hard, dry skin, and another which is not nervous but resembles moist, congealed skin, such that when touched with iron and tried to grasp with forceps, it cannot be done; both of these semblances begin towards the large tear gland and gradually increase until they cover all of the eye's vision and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is as follows: the patient puts their head in your hand, then opens their eyes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then grasp the angle with small-forceps double, and stretch it upwards; then take a needle, and put one horsehair or cow hair or ox hair on it, along with some strong thread; and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the angle, and pierce through with the whole needle, and tie the angle with a thread and stretch it up, and scrape off all around the angle that surrounds the pupil and the sclera up to the top, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear gland using the spatula subtly and small-forceps, leaving the natural flesh of the tear gland so that by the incision tears do not flow in their accustomed manner; and sometimes stretch the angle with tweezers only, and thread, as we have said; then scrape it off entirely with a soft spatula.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the delicate tissue and break it, nor pierce the pupil; and after the incision sprinkle some crushed celandine into the eye, and use collyrium made of litargire, leaving it overnight; then cure with whatever is appropriate until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the angle is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle and tweezers cannot enter, this semblance of angle is often cured with medicines; and as I have described in the division, it appears that there are several kinds, and if you see one cut open, then open the eye of the patient and take a light spatula slightly bent in this manner:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently lift the angle upwards and if it does not seem to thin out and you see that the reason persists, then distill from your mouth into the eye collyrium made of litargire and red collyrium and crushed celandine, and stop up the eye overnight; then recommence the other operation according to this same manner until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is any obstacle in the eye that prevents you from operating, such as a hot aposteme, then use milk first and cure the hot aposteme until it is healed; then recommence the operation as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the tear gland causes great harm to the eye, then suspend it with tweezers and cut off a part of it but not all, so that tears do not flow there; then distill red collyrium made of litargire into the eye.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	And about the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	**In the eyes of some men, there sometimes appears red flesh, which covers the pupil and presses on the papers around it, and resembles a cherry-red rose. The operation is such that the patient places his head in your hand, then you open his eyes, and coiled all this flesh with suitable tweezers for this purpose, and hold it firmly; then cut off the first flesh, and keep cutting right up to the end with the razor until finished, taking care not to injure the eye during the operation. The incision should be made with the scalpel that we have mentioned in the cutting of the nail and in small forces with which one removes the sebaceous matter, as the figure shows after this chapter. And when the incision is completed and all the flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with bruised wormwood or distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines onto it, and place cotton dipped in egg white over the eye so that it may be securely covered from hot inflammation. And if anything remains, and hot blood mounts up to you, and you doubt about hot inflammation, then leave the eye and treat the inflammation with things that appease hot inflammation. Then return to your operation until it is healthy, and thus do for all the flesh that has adhered to the eye by this method.**
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nonetheless it is necessary that you alleviate the cure of each weak eye by the natural way; and by the artificial way, in surgical operation with iron tools; and do not put your hand into any of these operations unless you see that these members are able to withstand this operation.
des voines des eulz	And about the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Before veins appear red which cover the eye, they obscure sight and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary that you first examine if the eye, where veins appear, is swollen and if there is no other visible disease except for swelling; then treat it in this manner: instruct the patient to put their head on your knee, then suspend those veins along its course according to your skill, and let the suspension be delicate and double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And hold two tweezers by degrees on one body according to this shape:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then carefully squeeze those delicate veins,
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all this in one hour, then apply a plaster to the eye of things that alleviate the pain of the eyes, and let it stay for several days until the pain is alleviated and an abscess is formed, then resume according to this method which is stated beforehand until he is healed; and this is the form of the treatment:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Physicians call a "fistula" an "arissati": when you cure it with cautery and with medicine that is hot and burning according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is treachery in it. You must cut open the abscess where it must burst, and draw out all the moisture that is inside until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption and blackness, then bring everything from the instruments that are present here according to this form; it is called "aspre chief" (sharp knife) and should be made of iron with a point like a chisel as shown in its current form
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then twist it between your fingers and press with your hand until you know that all the corruption has been removed. Do this several times, then return the site with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the area is solid and flesh does not appear, and the body of the bowels is solid, and remains so for 40 days, and it neither renews nor becomes an abscess, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healthy; but if not, then there is no other remedy than to redirect the fistula to the opening of the nose according to this form: namely, uncover the bone a second time with iron and hot medicines, and when it has been uncovered, take a borer according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the borer be tapered to its tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the bone near the cheekbone, and move your hand away from the eye and pouch, then turn the drill until it pierces the bone, and the patient feels it because the wind enters there if he holds his hand over his nose; and then restore to its place with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the joints, then the matter goes to the nose. Thus it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	About the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the eye opens entirely and nothing disturbs it nor diminishes its size, then you must bind the patient. Then rinse the eye, then place cupping glasses or hot jars without burning to suck out matter, then put on the eye a linen made of aloe, acacia, incense, and sarcocolle, then strain the eye with bandages and cloths in this manner: take soft cloths, double each one four times, then place them on top of each other according to how much the eye needs; then strain it with a firm bandage from above, then restart the cupping glasses to suck without burning. Then remove the cups and leave the eye strained day and night. If the linen moistens too much, you must change it often. Then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see that the eye is improving, that's good; but if not, then restart the bandage and linen and cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	About the bursting of an ocular vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption occurs in the ocular vein and opens up and paper comes out like a grain of resin, it is frightful to see. Then if you want to cover it, the procedure is as follows: take a needle and pierce it into the root of the part below until it reaches the part above, then take another needle with one doubled thread from the part by the eye socket; pierce this through and leave the first needle in place according to its position. Then sew up the site with the doubled thread and tie one part of the vein around it and strain it well, then remove the needle and place on the eye damp linen soaked in egg albumen. Leave it until the thread sticks with the vein, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed. And sometimes the wound is restrained by the vein on each side with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye becomes greatly inflamed, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes out from the back of the eye and corrects the moisture of the albuginous humor and lets the eye descend, and enter into it quickly. Then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	About the brow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but a bubble gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, yet it is not water. And the manner of its appearance when worked on is thus: have the patient sit on an appropriate and straight seat, then take his head between your two hands, and move it until you see the bubble rise to your eyes; then pierce it with a needle, and let it descend and disperse the light, and the patient sees things as he used to. And if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if its descent of the bubble is not as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	**If the patient sits between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make an incision through the conjunctive tissue with the cornea and the crown until the bow is released; and when it has been released, distill warm water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and honey, into the eye, then treat it further until it is healed.**
des aigues de l’oil	Water of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	**We have here examples of waters used in dividing [the eye] and those which should be used for piercing; operate according to the health [of the patient].**
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	**You must make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from sunlight; cover the good eye and hold it tightly. Then place the paper for the eye in your left hand if the eye is on the left, or in your right hand if it is on the right. Next, take the instrument called 'almagda' in your right hand if the eye is on the left, or your left hand if it is on the right. Place the tip of the instrument near the crown by the thickness of a ray from that corner of the eye towards the lesser lachrymal duct. Then insert the instrument called 'almagda' gently and twist your hand until you feel it reach the empty space in the corner of the eye. The measure of the path of almagda should be equal to the length from the width of a prune seed up to the end of the darkness; this is the crown of the eye. Then you will see the bone through the clear cornea, and then place the instrument where the water is and squeeze it along one pathway after another.**
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If water flows downwards now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a short time, if the water rises through the second pathway again, place the forceps with the instrument. Once it is inserted and it does not rise further, carefully extract the almagda by rotating your hand little by little; then put a little gem-silk into the water, and gently lift the eye from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Next, place over the eye a plug of linen moistened in rose oil and egg yolk, and tie it with the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Nowadays, we put crushed cinnamon on top with plenty of egg yolks.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then pierce the conjunctiva alone, not too deeply but make it subtlely; then insert the almagda as we have said. When completed, prepare for the patient a suitable resting place where he sleeps on his back in a dark room; let him be deprived of all movements and eat light foods; do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition until the third day. Then untie him in the same dark house, examine his sight, and make him see some things before tying him again for seven days. Do not perform this during the operation or after incision immediately, but rather afterwards when water rises suddenly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If a boil appears, then you should lance it on the sixth day, and use ointment that subdues inflammation; and when it is calmed, remove the bandage and put a plaster over it to cover it for some days, and keep it in this dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then let him leave the house little by little, and return to his usual activities; and know that no disciple should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Jericho, who told us that in some country they make almagda pierce the eye, from which they suck out the water, but nevertheless I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, so that those who do not know them may see them, and they should be made of pure silver:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	"And their heads of these same subtlety are two, and one behind has three angles."
de la char sor le neis	To remove flesh from the nostrils
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes various colored hairs are born, of which some seem like many-legged scorpions; and there are also such ones with hair enchanted in fox-colored hue, and soft hair of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of those hairs which are soft and not enchanted, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils and sprinkle the ointment on those hairs, and pull them strongly; then take what you can hold with the subtly sharp pointed tweezers on one side until you know that all the hair is gone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	"And if there remains anything that cannot be cut off, then open it with one of the light and sharp instruments so that nothing remains. And if it swells or becomes inflamed, then treat it as is necessary; but if it is malignant swelling, then hurry and cauterize until the blood stops flowing, and all the flesh has been removed, then apply oil or vinegar to the bones."
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose bleeds and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is healthy; but if moisture does not flow as it should, know that there is bone marrow in the bone above, which prevents the instrument from cutting. Therefore, you must insert a linen thread of moderate thickness, well soaked in hot water with spice between each knot at least one digit wide; and the patient should place the head of the thread in their nostril with some force and pull it out while smelling until it comes out through the nose into the mouth; children often do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wishes to do it. Then hold the head that comes out through the nose with one hand and the other head that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and guide them both gently in unison.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the knots have rotted away the bone marrow. Then pull out the thread, wipe off the blood, and wet the thread in Egyptian ointment, and place it back into the nose as before. Do this for three days or more, until the ointment has corroded all remaining bone marrow. Then insert a wick of lint into the nose for several days until it is healthy. If there is need for drying medicines, use them. This is the form of the instrument for purging the head, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	"And it should be made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp like a tube with its conduit likewise; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and the instrument full for purging the head; and let there be many holes at the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid."
de la char sor le neis	To remove flesh from the nostrils
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	"Often there appears on the head of the nostril a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large so that it is visible to look at; therefore you must cut it off at the beginning and remove all of it, then put on it the cautery or the burning medicine. And if one waits too long to cut it until it has become large, take care if it is hard, of dark color, and poor sense; do not touch it with iron for it is an engrained swelling, because when it is cut, great mischief comes upon the patient. But if the swelling is soft to touch, not of dark color, and you see that it can be completely cut off, then empty the nostril and cut it without fear, and cure it afterwards with drying and restrictive things."
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nostril is cut and cauterized
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solutions of continuity occur in one of these cartilages, they profit little, whether in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this happens to anyone, then see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips with a stitch, then heal it until it is clean; but if the lips are already separated on both sides, then scrape all parts of their core until they are clean, then join the two lips with a stitch, tie them together, powder dragon's blood powder and crushed incense on top; put a piece of strong plaster or another adhesive plaster on top, let it set by itself, then heal it with ointment until it is clean.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	"The manner of stitching is that you sew the wound together: either with needles, as we have said in abdominal suturing; or with thread, as I have told you."
des apostemes des levres	Of the swellings on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many men have within their lips hard abscesses, resembling grains of millet, small and large. Therefore, you must turn the lips, cut into each nodule, grasp it with forceps and cut it in every part; then apply powdered vitriol after the incision until the blood is stanched. Then apply the ointment of Aesculapius, and dress the area with dry things until it is clean.
de la char des gencives	Of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times fleshy growths appear on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus"; you must hold them with forceps and cut at their root, allowing the vein or blood to run; then apply powdered vitriol or other restrictive and drying powders to the wound; if this flesh grows back after the incision, which happens often, then cut it again and cauterize it: it will not return after the cautery. These are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	Of boils
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes escarps appear at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and sharp; sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish-green and worms come to the gum, causing foulness; therefore you must make the patient sit between your hands with their face in your lap and scrape away at the escarps until nothing remains; do the same for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains until they are all removed; if what caused them is removed first, that is good; otherwise restart on the second day and continue on the third until everything has been scraped off; know that teeth require various forms of instruments for scraping according to the task at hand, as those used to scrape between teeth differ from those used to scrape around them; have all these forms and others ready with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you are treating a toothache, it is necessary to wait before extracting until the pain has ceased, for one should never perform such an operation while the patient is in pain. For it is a delicate matter that requires great skill and offers no excuse for failure.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is constricted by a draught, you must be certain of the throbbing tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain leaves the patient and they think it is in a wisdom tooth, and have the good tooth pulled out; but still the pain does not depart because the bad one remains, for we have seen this happen many times. And when you are certain of the throbbing tooth, then scrape around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gum on all sides; then move it with your thumbs or fine forceps little by little until it is well loosened, then firmly fix the forceps; and keep the patient's head steady between your legs so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth straightly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take any of these tools and place it gently on each side, and with the lever move it as you have done previously.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and rotten, then you must fill it with wads where the holes are; and hold it gently with pliers so that it does not break while extracting; and much bleeding must be done around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And make sure you do not break it, and if a piece remains, it will return to the patient through the wickedness of the root causing even greater pains than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeons who through their haste and recklessness sometimes break the jawbone, and bring about what we have mentioned here; but they often cause great illness through the infection of those remaining roots or the broken bone, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the place with wine, vinegar, and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, fill the place with crushed vitriol; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments used to extract teeth should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when extracting a tooth. These are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	"And let them be of heavy members so they do not bend at all during the pulling, and let them be of good iron well-made, and let them have teeth for holding moves."
de la racine des dens	"from the root of the teeth"
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	If the root remains at the draw, you must put moistened cotton smeared with butter for 1 or 2 days on the wound
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 until the joint is softened, then insert the tongs called "algefri", with which the head seems like a bird's beak; and shape them inside as if filing it.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and place the instrument called "althali," that is, tweezers, this is the form.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out, this is good; if not, then help yourself with all the instruments, these forms come later.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument which has two handles, this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are placed on the surface of the teeth, and this instrument resembles large pliers, here is its form
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And these instruments should be strong enough not to break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments which are not counted. And the wise master finds his instrument himself according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity. And if one breaks one's cart or other bones where it could be useful, then one searches among the instruments that are necessary, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, this is its form
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and hold well to hold the bone so that it does not escape but can grasp and remove it. Then restore the place with appropriate medicine, and if there is rot in the bone and it is small, then remove it with all this instrument
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear not according to their natural shape, and their form is ugly, especially in young women, then you must know if the tooth is close behind the tooth and not in its proper place, and one cannot set it right or file it: then scrape it; and if it is against the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak and has iron pointed at the end
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And gently tap with your hand every day for the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent so that one can file it, then use a file like this whose form is like
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file used to make needles. And gently file the tooth little by little every day so that it does not move too much until it falls out. Then smooth it at the end with any plane and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file off its sharpness until it is even enough not to cut the tongue nor corrupt speech
quant li dent lochent	When teeth lock
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth before the opening falls out, either from blow or fall, and the patient cannot chew without the food escaping, even after treating it with constricting medicines, then you must constrain it with a gold thread.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grasp the heads of the thread with a pair of pliers, and bring them together, and insert them between the healthy teeth, and hold it in place so that it does not injure the tongue; then let it remain thus tightly as long as it can endure, and if it loosens or the threads break, then bind it with another thread; thus it will remain and serve throughout its duration, and this is the shape of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy ones, and of the two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it should be replaced in its place little by little as we have said. And only those who are wise and skilled should undertake this task, and sometimes they make the shape of a tooth from cow bone and put it in the place where there is a gap and tighten it with wire as we have described, and it will remain in place for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut the frenulum of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this tie comes under the tongue or naturally; or by accident of a healed wound; and its operation is as follows: you open the patient's mouth and hold their head in your lap, and lift their tongue up. Then grasp the nerve-like tie with broad forceps until the tongue is loosened from its attachment, and if there is any hardness or knot, which comes from the healing of a wound, then insert the nail-scraper and cut through it with broad forceps; but be careful that the incision is not too deep, because the artery lies underneath. And when you have done this, then apply a compress of rose water and sage, or cold water, and place a linen pad under the tongue each night so that the head does not heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if there is a flow of blood, place powdered vitriol on the wound. And if the blood continues to flow, cauterize it with a slow-acting cautery that is good for this purpose. Then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is of dusky color or black or hard, but the patient does not feel it, do not touch it because it is a chancre. And if it tends to become an ulcer and there is moisture present, then use a needle and make a small incision with a sharp scalpel and remove it from both sides. If bleeding occurs during your procedure, sprinkle powdered vitriol until it stops bleeding. Then continue your procedure until all the flesh is removed. Then rinse the area with sage and honey and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes in the throat there appear growths called 'godath', which are properly called tonsils. If you treat them as we have said earlier, but they do not heal, then beware: if they are hard tumors with a small opening and dark color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for fear of bleeding. But let it ripen until it becomes soft, and then you can remove it, or it will burst on its own. And if it is white and has a small root, prepare the instrument to cut it out, but first check if the abscess is warm, rests quietly, and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then seat the patient before the sun, and let their head rest in your hand. Have them open their mouth and take the serum between your hands, pressing the tongue from below with all instruments, of which this is the form; and it should be made of fine silver or brass like a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue against all this instrument? And when you see the boil, take the lancet and insert it into the head of it, and twist it up above as much as you can; then draw out some of the cloth with it, and cut off the instrument, of which here is the shape, resembling a crow's foot; and its ends are curved, one towards the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then use pincers, of which here is the shape
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side and pointed on the other; and when you have cut off one of the kernels, then cut off the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle with hot water and salt-water, and if there is any bleeding, gargle with water in which pomegranate skins have been cooked, or myrtle leaves, or similar things, until the blood is stanched; then treat it until it is healed. And sometimes other boils appear in the throat besides the two kernels, so cut them off likewise as you would the two kernels.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was near the throat, specifically one that was small in size. The swelling had closed almost all of her throat so that she could not exhale through the obstructed passage, nor eat or drink, and would have died if left untreated for two days
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was already so swollen that it had pushed out both ears through the nostrils
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then quickly proceeded to insert a needle into one nostril and draw out much pus; afterwards I inserted another needle into the other nostril and opened her mouth, pressing down on her tongue. Then I inserted the needle into the abscess and cut away part of it, releasing only a little blood. Thus the woman's throat passage was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine. But I kept cutting away at the abscess for a long time, and it continued to grow back, filling up the space that I had emptied until it became very large again. Then I lanced it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it stopped growing. And I left those parts, not knowing what God did with her afterwards.
de l’uve	The eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When it rises up to the eyelid, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; but if it is below and thick and round, it is called "uve.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all, but you see that the surrounding swelling has subsided, and it appears thin, then you must cut it open; and if it is round and well-formed and not long, and it is sanguineous or reddish-black in color, then you must avoid incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient thereby.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it according to its appearance and length, make the patient sit before the sun, press their tongue with the instrument mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eyelid and pull it underneath, cutting with the two instruments I have mentioned in the incision of two lymph nodes.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut more than the excess that is beyond its natural limit; for if you cut more, it grieves both voice and speech. And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two amygdalae, until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears being cut, you must use a device for cauterizing that fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of cautery is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient places their head in your hand, and then you press the tongue with the instrument mentioned in the cautery chapter, and apply hot water with a little salt so that it is not too thick or too clear; and using this instrument carefully, here is its shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it has at the top a small vessel where one puts the medication, like the horn of a spoon, and puts the instrument with all the medicine on the eyelid; and the patient should lie on their side so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth away from the medicine and the eyelid, so that it does not reach the throat and cause swelling. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eyelid for about half an hour until you see that it is darkened and the bites of the medicine are calmed; and if necessary, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the canal above until the cotton touches the eyelid; do this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry and fall off after 4 or 5 days. And if you need to start the cauterization again with the medicine, then restart it, and afterwards wipe around the eyelid with cotton soaked in oil, and clean what is around the medicine; and rinse with cold water and gargle until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more gentle than cutting or cauterization. If it is treated with fumigation in this way, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and chamomile and similar herbs, and mix them all together or some of them into one pot; put a little incense inside, and make it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with earthenware, and there should be one small vessel like this inside the pot:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it is made of silver or bronze, and one of its heads is inserted into the patient's mouth until steam reaches the eye through the canal, until the eye is cauterized. Afterwards repeat often until the eye dries up, but make sure not to do this at the beginning of an inflamed abscess, as many things can happen there; and do not do it too far beyond the decline of heat.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a cane and put an egg shell on its end so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; for the egg shell does not let the vapor hurt the mouth, and this together with health is good care.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times, a bone or fish spine, or some other thing, gets stuck in the throat; therefore you must pull out what you can see, and press the tongue with the instrument so that you can see it move; and whatever is not visible and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps then the thing will come out through vomiting; or the patient has swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of flaxseed, or a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches its place, it will be visible, and then pull it out; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take one instrument made of lead according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at its end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have its end raised up high; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest the whole thing go down, nor push the bone in too far; and it is better for the patient themselves to insert the instrument, for they will know where the thing has lodged itself; then draw it out gently along the entire length of the instrument until it comes out completely.
de la sansue de la gorge	de la sansue de la gorge
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Blood is sometimes treated, as I have said in the division, by medicinal treatment. But if this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, and then press the tongue with the instrument I mentioned.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vein, then treat it with a small iron pin or with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, then take a headed cane and put it into the throat of the patient, and then put red-hot iron on the head of the cane, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient sweats all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take plenty of cold water and open the mouth, pour it in without letting it be swallowed, and move it with your hand frequently. And as soon as the blood feels the water, it will stop flowing.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	If it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will fall without troubling.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	The manner of the fumigation is that you take one pot which has live coals in it, and its mouth is covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and into this hole place the head of the instrument. Then throw your fumigation onto the coals, and the patient places the end of the tube in their mouth and closes their lips so that no smoke escapes, but reaches the eye. And the stone will now fall out, and if it does not, then recommence the fumigation many times; and let the patient thirst, and eat salty and bitter foods, and do not drink water. And then it will be necessary for the stone to pass by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the blood clot is this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved tongs for entering into the throat; and it has the shape of a crow's beak, and has sharpness like a file, so that whatever it takes hold of, it cannot let go. And here you see its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	Chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings forth here from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision; and there are two manners among them, one being like its own kind, and those that retain moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for those places where abscesses are located on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	because the abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that occur in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the bowels have died according to their fullness; and there are some that must be pierced when they are ripe, even if they do not die on their own.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses occur near joints, and they are left until they have rotted around, sometimes the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is near the main limb, and if you delay perforating it until it is dead, it will harm the main limb. But where it is near the fundament, pierce it before it dies. It is not necessary to pierce a hard abscess without digestion completed, except for that which is near the fundament, lest it rot deeply and become elongated inside, and a fistula occur; and it cannot be healed in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	"And you must know the hour for piercing an abscess that has died according to its course, and this is when the pain has ceased, and the division of the fever, and the decrease of the pain and redness, and from bursting and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you must make the piercing lower down where the abscess depends more, and where it opens most; and let the piercing be long like the body of a finger, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints near nerves and arteries, and in all smooth places where there is no wrinkle."
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those cases where they affect, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better that you delay perforating until it is confirmed with digestion completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	But if you pierce it before that time, the body of the venom will be elongated, and it will be full of much filth; and perhaps the lips and depth of it will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And some abscesses should be pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you bring small incisions for small abscesses, small openings; and for large abscesses, large openings, and many slits according to the likeness of the size of the abscess; And there are such abscesses where it is necessary to insert hot coals, and cover them when they have become like embers and softened, then you must do likewise as one does with blisters: And there are those that are cut into three angles, and there are those from which one cuts like the leaf of a mulberry tree, such as angelic abscesses; And there are those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar incisions.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, such as soft superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them plainly; And when the abscess is large and has drawn much bowels, and you pierce it, then do not draw out all the bowels at once, but draw out a part; Then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again afterwards; Do this many times little by little, until all the bowels come out; Likewise if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying child, or young infants, or old decrepit men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit sometimes jumps at the release of the bowstring, which by chance causes the death of the patient, and you do not realize it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore study this chapter carefully, and when you have pierced your abscess, open the wound and examine if the wound from the abscess is small. And if it is a full incision, then bring linen or old cotton pads; and if it is a large abscess with many holes, then you must insert one pad into each so that they come together. And if you have cut off a piece of skin from the abscess and scraped around it, then you must fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth without moisture, and bind it for three days; then remove it and apply ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if flows of blood occur during your procedure, then bring cold water and towels, wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, apply governance and care, and the powders that I have mentioned earlier in this book, especially in wintertime when the location of the abscess is very nervous. In such case, you should place moistened cloths and bandages in hot wine and oil upon it; but if it's in summertime and the spot is fleshy, then you must apply damp cloths in cold water and oil, or in wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said. Then remove the bandage, cleanse and treat it until it's healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	"And this one must know universally in the cure of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed with the cure of abscesses, and here is that chapter."
des soros	Here are some translations of the word "soros" from Middle French to English:
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the head meets the neck come small abscesses, resembling those of chickens in their skin, and there are many similar ones.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fleshy and moist like chickens; but there are also those that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt that they block the arteries.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting is such that you should test all instruments called 'entromissoire', from which the form comes later, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	But if it contains moisture, then close it with a long stitch.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied, then scrape clean without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, because it returns again if anything is left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and this will chase away what remains of the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then recommence with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and on the third, until you know well that there is no longer anything left of the night; then dress the wound with suitable ointment, until it is clean.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds much fat, cut it according to this form with a long incision; and sprinkle your onions on it, scrape it from all sides, and pay great attention to drawing out the coat where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, do what I tell you later.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And likewise do for an abscess if it is hard, and with cutting and dressing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cutting of a hard and moist abscess is easier, because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And some of these abscesses have no moisture at the head, and there are those hard abscesses that I cut from the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, which could not be broken; and if one had struck it with anything, it would have made a wound like that of a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that come at the head, especially those which come at the heads of children and at the roots of ears, always open them at the lowest point to allow the bowels to escape; and dress them as is necessary.
des scrophules	scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin; sometimes they also come elsewhere on the body, and there are many of them, and they intertwine with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each boil is properly within its own hide, such as the nodule and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many kinds similar to these boils.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others malignant that refuse to yield to healing.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Therefore, if you see one that is well-disposed to touch and resembles the color of flesh, moves freely on each side and is not hard by the nerves of the neck or artery or vein, nor deep; then you should cut it open from above, scrape off its surface on all sides, and keep the lips of the wound closed with compresses if necessary, as we have said regarding head abscesses. And remove it bit by bit, ensuring that you do not cut into the nerve or vein, nor use a sharp or cutting knife, lest your hand slip and cut deeper than intended.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery and blood does not allow you to work, then place powdered vitriol or some powders that stop bleeding in the wound, and hold the wound tightly; keep it like this until the abscess is soothed, and the wound begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the bleeding stops, return to your work until you finish it; then check on your fingers for any small scabs, if there are any cut and remove them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, then it is not necessary to cut that scab at its root, but rather tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall off naturally; then fill the wound with cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the entire scab, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up tightly; for there will be no excess left due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you must understand to cover the root of it, and draw fire, and the cut as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that hold excessiveness, prick where it appears dead; and prick thus as the one before said, depending, then bring tent with ointment and similar things, so it corrupts what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, then cure with ointment entering flesh until it is sound.
de squinance	de squinance
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote about the operation of cutting a throat, but I never saw it done in our land, and that is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have quinsy, it is necessary that the opening of the throat called "epiglottis" be cleared; and one does not receive help through this, for all the veins and the vessels of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two glands.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the vessels, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid suffocation which comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it below three circles or four with a small slit across between two circles or according to the quantity of the slit of the syfac, not in the cartilage; and those places are suitable for cutting the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long inside.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the throat all around the hinge, then cut into the heart until it reaches the chin; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cover the syfac as we have said; and it is proven by the section of the nerve of the chin that spouts fire where it is broken, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open a little.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour of doubt about strangulation has passed, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart and sew it up entirely without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked off, and the patient is judged to be near death, and his breathing has failed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and they breathe through the wound, thus guarding against death; and for this reason, the ancients ordered that the wound should remain open until the worst of the illness has passed, which takes three or four days. And then they commanded that the wound be sutured and dressed until it was healed; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a knife and stabbed it into her throat, cutting some of the channels of the lungs; and I was called to treat her, but found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that the blood issuing from it was not from the veins or arteries but only from the throat, and the breath was coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sutured the wound, treating it until it was healed; and the young lady suffered nothing but hoarseness of voice, returning afterward to her usual condition. Therefore I say that cutting the epiglottis should not be feared.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large one with the color of a fig, and it often occurs in women. It has two types: natural and accidental; however, the natural type does not have any cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental type has two forms: one is similar to fatty tissue, while the other resembles an abscess that comes from an artery. One should be cautious and only operate with fire for those that are small, and first test and search through the entire passageway: if you find it like the aforementioned fatty tissue, and not connected to any vein, cut it as one cuts fat, removing all of it until there is none left; then carefully examine everything and treat it accordingly so that it becomes perfectly healthy.
des nous	of fatty tumors
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many types of fatty tissue, all of which I will describe; however, now I must discuss the difference between fat and an abscess.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	"I say that an abscess is hot and feverish until the suppuration has passed, at which point it becomes filled with pus, and then the fever and heat subside."
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains syrupfac, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a jar, and becomes large; and they are either fatty or moist, and most of them have the color as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	"When treating a fatty tumor, it is necessary to first examine and express the contents using an instrument called the 'intromittor', according to the shape described in the following chapter."
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	The manner of inquiring into the apostemes of the nose is that you take the moistest part that you find in the aposteme, and twist your two fingers little by little until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the aposteme; then extract the intruder, and beware of what jumps out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If running moisture is thin, whatever its color may be, open it as I said for other apostemes; and if no moisture comes out after the instrument, know that it is fatty, then cut it in a cross shape, grasp it with tweezers, lightly scrape each side, and watch the skin where it lies, pull it out whole with the knot; and if you cannot pull it out whole, pull it out in pieces until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If anything remains there, the wound will reopen many times; and if a little remains and the blood grievously festers, then apply to the wound some corrosive waters and powders, bind the wound, and place soothing substances for an inflamed abscess, continuing other treatments until it is healed; and if the wound is large, cut away the two lips of the wound, treating those that encroach upon flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	"And if a vein is beating nearby or another complication arises, quickly apply powdered vitriol to the area, leaving it on for two or three days until the wound becomes suppurated and the inflammation of the blood subsides, then return to remove any remaining fatty tumor."
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the shapes of the instruments for dilating fistulas, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. There are four square ones called "albarets" and one called "breb." They also come in three sizes to encircle fistular abscesses, similar to those used for sewing curses. They are made of citrine brass, iron, or silver. Those made of yellow brass are the best, but blackened ones are more commonly used to encircle the openings of fistulas. They come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the onions are in many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are also onions with two curves of three kinds; and there are those with three curves, which are also of three kinds; and there are those with two curves, and onions with only one curve, which are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these are cutting, and there are some that do not cut but only on one side, with which one scrapes the nails to avoid cutting the vein or nerve; and among these instruments are the alembic spoons used in many hands so that the patient does not notice them when opening abscesses; and they come in three sizes: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses them only on thick flesh, such as legs, arms, breasts, angles, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another small instrument resembling a pair of tweezers according to this shape, with which one stops blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	"And it is sometimes placed at the location where veins and arteries are severed or where there has been excessive bleeding. Sometimes they are made in this larger size:"
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell when they begin to become corrupted, appearing like those of a woman; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to treat them must follow this form as far as line .b. up to .g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape away the fat and dress the wound with healing herbs. Then bring together the two lips of the wound to stitch them closed, and continue treating it until it is healed; and if the breast hangs down and is softened by its size as happens in women, then make two similar incisions above, one touching the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.; then scrape away the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever else is necessary in treatment until it is healed; and if it does not heal, or if the incision was not complete because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you should fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. Leave it there until it eats away the remaining flesh and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	"Abscesses of the armpits"
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	"The abscesses that occur under the arms are usually hard tumors resembling scrofula or have rough surfaces, and some contain moisture."
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the boil has been drained out, then fill the wound with soft cotton, and leave it until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and dress it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the boil resembles scrofula, then cut it as we have said for scrofula wounds, and if the wound fills with pus again, then apply a cauterization as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is severed and the skin above it is closed, many abscesses often form, and likewise happens when a vein bursts open; and one can thus recognize this when the abscess is long and deep. When you feel it with your fingers, you sense pulling; but when it's due to a vein, then disfigurement appears clearly. It is foolish to cut into such an abscess, especially if it's under the buttocks or armpits, around the neck, and in many other locations, where it becomes very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, it is necessary to avoid cauterization and cutting into the wound. Instead, if it's an arterial swelling that has pierced the skin deeply, first cut through the fat around the arteries and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it's exposed. Then insert a needle underneath one side of the artery and push it through to the other side, tying the artery with a double thread in two places as I have shown you for extracting two temporal arteries. Next, prick the point between the two ligatures with an introjector until all the blood comes out, then drain the abscess and clean it well. Then apply dressings so that they stick to the wound, using appropriate ointments until it's healed. If the swelling is due to a vein incision, then you should take a needle in your hand from where the swelling begins to its end on the skin, insert it underneath the point you're holding with your hand and push it through, tying a double thread so that you can pull it out from the other side. Then tie the abscess as I have told you, using two heads of thread tied together in two places. If you doubt whether the threads are secure, then insert another needle along the entire length of the thread underneath the first incision and tie them off at four points. Then cut into the abscess until all the superfluities come out, then cut away the excess skin around the heart and leave what's tied. Finally, apply a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, and apply dressings with ointments until it's healed.
des apostemes des ners	of boils on the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, just as boils come to the artery and vein, so too do boils appear on the nerves when they are injured or from excessive exertion, etc.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens most often in shoulders and hips and in all places where there are joints, and it is the worst kind of abscesses, with a color similar to that of the body. It is present in many different conditions without pain; however, when pressed strongly, the patient feels pain not deep in the body but beneath the heart. It moves well in all directions but does not go forward or backward nor up nor down. One should not attempt to cover it with iron as this might cause contraction. Those that are on the head or forehead are painful at the temples.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, grasp it with tweezers and cut it at its root; if it is large, suspend it with forceps and scrape it off, then remove the skin and sew the wound closed until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of hanging warts
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes this happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is an illness called 'fungus' due to its resemblance to one. The roots are thin and the heads large; some are small and others very large. I saw a man who had two on his belly that were more like mushrooms than anything else, with no difference between them. They were white, had fine roots, and were often split open, with moisture constantly flowing from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I weighed them and found that one was XVIII ounces in weight and the other VI З. The operation of the incision is such that you should observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is pale and moist with a subtle root; then cut it with a broad spatumile, and have the cautery on fire ready.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	When cutting, there are often too many large flows of blood. If your hand slips, quickly apply the cautery. And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made linen thread, tie it around the artelul as we have described, and leave it for two days; then restrict it, and keep pulling on the linen thread until it cuts through the artelul, removing it without difficulty. And if the roots are large, there is fear in cutting even the belly, but you can cut half of it, cauterize it so that it does not return, then dress the wound, and be careful not to cut the thelul which has a rust color, poor sense, and produces milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	"For this is an incurable tumor, and I will discuss the treatment for cancer later on."
quant li boude ist fuer	"When the wound has healed"
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from a cauterization of a wound or a fissure of the scrotum, and is on the belly and in some cases on the buttocks, as it happens in other hernias, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what precedes, or from windiness; and if it is due to the rupture of the scrotum and the outlet of the bowel, then the color of the boil resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and has various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the bursting of the intestine, then it becomes more diverse; and when it is pressed with two fingers it sinks in and then returns, and sometimes it is hard, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the anus during difficult labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining at all; and if it is due to blood, then the boil appears large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and its appearance shows whether it is from arterial blood, venous blood, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary for you to leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Because there is doubt and fear about it, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If the appearance is for the intestine or the belly button, then you should command the patient to lie on their back, with their arms extended straight out, and have them turn onto one side. Then place the patient lying flat between your hands, and proceed around the area you have marked with all the instruments. Then extend half of the abscess above the ligature with all the large forceps; then tie it tightly around with a strong string or cord made of fine silk thread, leaving the knot untied. Then open half of the abscess extended over the ligature and insert your index finger inside to find the intestine. If you find that it is caught in the ligature, release it and bring the intestine out from the front of the abdomen. And if you find the belly button, then cut away any excess tissue; if the artery or vein opposes you, carefully go around it again, return to your work and take two needles and attach them to two strong threads. Insert the two needles crosswise into where you pierced earlier; then hold the abscess at three points above the needles with forceps, and if it opens, remove the needles and leave the area until it can suppurate naturally and cut away any dead tissue there. Then cure the area according to what is needed, and cauterize the abscess as we have said; then extract any blood or moisture you find, then cure the area as required and suture the wound closed.
dou chancre	Of a chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the section on the signs of a chancre and how one should treat it with medicines, and how to avoid surgical treatment. Now we will discuss a chancre that is spreading to the marrow and requires great caution in its treatment. The ancients said that when a chancre appears where it can be scraped off like those found on the breast or hip, then all of it must be removed at the beginning; but if it is large and old, one should not approach it because I have never seen anyone heal from one, nor have I heard of any such case before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operation is performed where it can be removed, as we have said, it is done thus: first purge the patient with black colic; then make them vomit if they show signs of repletion, and prepare the patient a good place to perform the operation. Then grasp the chancre with tweezers and cut it all around and remove it completely without leaving anything behind. Let the blood flow freely and squeeze the wound with your hand or some other object until bleeding stops. If bleeding from the incision of an artery or vein hinders you, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. Then treat the wound with other remedies until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have previously discussed the similarities of dropsy in our division, and how the gathering of water is formed, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: only 'eclites' is mentioned; and one should not touch with iron in these two similarities: namely tympanites and hippocratic coughs, for they are deadly things; therefore when you treat this dropsy similarity called 'eclites' with medicine, and the cure does not help, look to see if the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as indigestion and similar things. Do not touch them with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient to be strong and vigorous, and they do not have any other illness but dropsy alone, and they are neither too young nor too old, then you should act thus: lift the patient upright onto your hands, and the assistants press the belly outwards pushing the water towards the lowest part of the chest, then take the spatula spinous in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Pierce it with a point, but do not pierce too deeply lest it reach the intestines when inserted, and do not let it bleed. Then see if dropsy has entered near the intestines: you must make an incision three fingers' breadth directly below the navel; if dropsy is due to liver disease, the incision should be made on the left side of the third fingerbreadth; if it is due to worms, it should be made on the right. Ensure that the patient does not lie on the incision so that superfluities do not flow into this weak area. Then pierce all the skin with the instrument and insert it, raising your hand between the skin and the sinew as in flaying, to the breadth of one nail or about there; then pierce the sinew until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is the location of the water; then draw forth the instrument, and insert this one instead. Here is its form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is like a thin silver rod, and it is made of gold or light arrowhead material, and has a small hole in its lower part; and on one side, three holes; and two on another side, and one more; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers use to cut feathers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it then descends onto the instrument; empty out either half or a third of it now, for if you empty more than is necessary at this time, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls unconscious, or he approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of its power, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's power signify, and his pulses; then draw out the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now by the heart that stops up the hole that is on the face, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then recommence the instrument the following day, if you see the patient enduring these things, and draw out a small quantity of water; do this for a few days, and guard against leaving too much but only a little drop of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the patient, and leave much water on him, so treat it with hot burial or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and sun, and dye for drinking; and treat it with drying medicines until it is dry, and cauterize it on the stomach and liver and spleen after removing the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	The section on impotence is titled "De l'estopement de la verge" which means "On the stoppage of the penis". This refers to erectile dysfunction or impotence. The text discusses the causes and treatments for this condition.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small one, or one that is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it must be pierced promptly with a very fine needle according to this shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then put the thin plug of lead in the hole and tie it tight and hold it thus for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps there will be no need for it, because urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose hole is small shall use lead plaster, as we have said, so it may widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose hole is not in its proper place are hindered. For some are born with the hole at the tip of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis upward; and they cannot ejaculate because semen cannot reach the marrow, and this is a severe illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The technique for performing a circumcision is as follows: have the patient lie on their back. Then grasp the glans of the penis and cut it around like the tip of a feather quill so that the urethral opening remains in its proper position. Be careful not to cause bleeding, which can occur frequently during this procedure. If bleeding does occur, use something that stops bleeding and treat any resulting wound until it has healed.
des pustules de la verge	Of the blisters of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often these blisters appear on the penis, and there is an ugly appearance of skin; and some are malignant and others benign. Therefore you must take them with tweezers, squeeze them out and clean all of them thoroughly, then put wet cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then apply the ointment diaphoretic until it is gone.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the navel is inflamed, of foul color and smelling bad, you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it off, and if the navel is high on the penis, with part inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the piece that is inside. And when it is healed, then treat the outside part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if you treat both parts together, the head of the penis may not be securely closed, and blackness and corruption will come to its interior and the coition. So you must cut away everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made from honey and flour mixed with ground pomegranate rind and figs, and then treat it further until it is healthy again.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And the cauteries help in two conditions combined: namely, for bleeding and corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you should place a tube of lead into the opening of the penis, so that the patient can urinate through it. And when the skin at the tip of the penis becomes attached, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or occurs due to wound or abscess, then you must burn it with the hair-removing instrument until the adhesions are severed and the head of the penis is freed from all sides. And if it is difficult to separate them, then you should burn a little at the tip of the penis and skin with the spatula. Then gently separate them, and place a thin, moistened linen cloth soaked in cold water between them, so that they do not adhere again.
de la circoncision	Et se c’est un garcon qui doit estre circoncis, si covient que tu coupes le pelz a .vi. mois, et les autres enfans a .xii. mois; et il est bon quant tu les feras circonsire quant l’enfant aura .iii. ans ou environ.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like other wounds in its continuity; nevertheless, when we perform this operation willingly and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work with the least harm possible.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children because it was not part of their law, and we only have knowledge of it through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have wanted the majority of masters and surgeons who perform circumcision around one dal, and by force, and for an entire novacule; so it was that the heart would flee because there are two tissues, and sometimes one cuts the upper one and leaves the lower one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Otherwise they cover it up and the pain is doubled, and at the time of cleansing the point of the member is not secure; and sometimes during cleansing of the foreskin the knife slips and ruins the operation, and many times it happens that they do not need cleansing, which I have seen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Regarding the cleansing done by force, I have found that using a thread tied around the entire length is the best experiment because the force cuts equally well both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand thus, cut evenly throughout the whole tension; but let the thread be tightly wrapped around the skin; and let the manner of the first operation be such that you make the child think, if he hears, that you are only tying the thread around the rod, and then let him enjoy all the ways you can; then hold him upright between your hands, and press down with your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them nor any tools; then place your hand on the rod and blow toward the heart, and pull it up until the head of the rod is inside; then clean it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place shut with a double thread, then tie it under one knot to another; and hold it with both hands by the second knot near the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two knots, then quickly lift up the heart and pull out the head of the rod; then let the blood flow freely from one opening to another, for this is the mother's womb; and sprinkle powder on top, and on the powder place a gauze bandage made from a cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, mixed with good fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, then treat further as needed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	"The form of the instruments for cleansing should be as follows: the two tips should be thin and sharp, and the tips should also be as large as a hazelnut, equal in size:"
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	"The error of cleansing occurs when the heart is inside the incision, therefore it is necessary to extend it with your fingernail before the wound becomes inflamed; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use forceps, and then cut it."
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	"And if it lasts for three days and the part below the staff is swollen, let it be until the inflammation has subsided, then gently scrape off the scab; cut as much as you can move without harming the part of the staff, for it will not harm it."
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Therefore treat the wound with quick-acting powder, as we have said when treating powders, and if you cut too much from the heart and it goes upwards, it will not harm. Treat it therefore as we have said until it heals."
dou retenement de l’urine	"On the retention of urine"
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is caused by the blockage of a stone, or congealed blood, or bowels, or flesh newly born, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division; and if urine is not released, and you see that there is a blockage due to a stone located at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to bend over on their knees; and place their feet on the ground behind them, and stretch out their belly towards the back, and have the patient lean forward as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder will be forced open from above to release the stone, so that urine flows out; and if it does not come out, as we have mentioned, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using all the instruments called "syringe", the form of which is: and let it be made of thin, light silver, like a bird's feather; and let the tube be one and a half palms long, and let it be thin at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	To draw out urine, take a doubled thread and tie it to the top of a wad of wool or cotton. Insert the thread's end into the syringe. Cut off any excess wool and insert it up to the syringe's top. Then oil the syringe with olive oil and melted wax. Have the patient sit on a chair. Oil their bladder and penis with warm olive oil, molten wax, and cold water. Lightly place the syringe in the penis until it reaches the root. Then fold the penis upwards towards the belly. Insert the syringe further until the patient feels it reach the bladder. If not done correctly due to a bent tube, pull out the thread slowly, following the wool wad. Urine will follow the wool. Remove the syringe and allow urine to flow. Repeat the process until the bladder is empty and the patient relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	"On the diseases of the bladder"
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	"When there is erosion or blood in the bladder, or putrefaction has accumulated there, and you see that watery and medicinal substances are being discharged, then use all the instruments called a 'clepsydra', of which this is the form:"
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the raised area by which the medical cautery should be placed so that it stops up the tube well without additional pressure, so that moisture can be drawn out, and inserted when needed; and when you see your medicines entering the bladder, place the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw what is inside; then draw the moisture into the catheter, and then strongly push the catheter back in; thus the moisture will enter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle enema used to enemize the bladder.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher up; and below there is one opening where the string falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put inside it the moisture with which you wish to enema the bladder, then tie it between two breasts firmly with a doubled thread, and heat this moisture on the fire until boiling point; then place the tip of the catheter in the tube, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has passed into it, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, make a circle out of it, pierce it roundly around the edge; then strongly insert the thread into these holes, then join the circle together like closing a door, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it onto the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	"on stones"
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	"I have already discussed in the section on stones their different types and methods of extraction along with medicinal remedies. I also explained the difference between stones that enter through the rains and all the signs associated with them, as well as which stones require surgical intervention - both in the bladder and in the penis. I will now explain this briefly and clearly."
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	"I say that stones which enter the bladder occur most frequently in children. This is a sign that urine is being expelled from the bladder like water in its fineness. The child will strain and grind his penis and frequently urinate until it becomes painful. In many cases, this condition is accompanied by inflammation. Children under the age of four usually have an easy recovery, while older adults find it much more difficult. Those who are middle-aged fare moderately well. The cure is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones."
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	When we come to treat, first cleanse the patient with an enema to draw out all the feces in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes hinders finding the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and raise and move them downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out near the top. Then have him sit between your hands and put his hands under his thighs so that the bladder is completely tilted downward. Then search for it and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in its place, quickly cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall out upon touching the whole, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is an adult. Then insert it into his anus and search for the stone; when you feel it on your finger, press it against the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger and push the stone out where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands that with his right hand he stretch the scrotum upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the scrotum in the part where the incision is made; then insert the spatula like this, which is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make between those who are between the thighs and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh; and let it be straight over the stone, and your two hands always on the fundament, and let the cut of the traverse be so that it is wide at its mouth and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure from the hand that is on the fundament causes it to fly forth without labor. And know that there are such stones with angles and edges: they are difficult to extract. And there are those that are beneath, resembling a gland, round, whose exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For those stones with angles and edges, make the cut larger. If it does not pass, then you must extract using tongs that are like a file at the head, to grab the stone so that it does not escape; or you place beneath it a subtle curved instrument at the end. And if you cannot grasp it thus, then enlarge the hole around the passage. If blood spurts forth, then stop it with vitriol. If there are more than one stone, first place the largest in the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then draw it out, and afterward extract the smaller ones if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it must be opened wider and a larger incision made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then two things happen to the patient: either they die or urine begins to flow constantly through the opening that cannot be closed. Nevertheless, make every effort to extract it with forceps, cutting it into pieces until you have completed your work. Then dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bind it, and place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil and rose water and cold water on top to cool the hot abscess. Then have the patient rest on their back, and do not untie the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove the bandage, wash the wound area very well with oil and water, then apply ointment of diacereion and ointment of basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses and corrosions appear in the wound, and congealed blood forms in the bladder, causing urine to be retained in such a way that it flows out suddenly with urine: then cauterize the wound, remove that blood because if any remains, it will corrupt the bladder. Then wash the wound with water, vinegar, and salt, and assist the patient in all ways you know until they are healed. And every time you treat them, tie their two thighs together and apply the medications to the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passageway of the penis, stuck inside, and urine cannot flow out; then the treatment I mentioned earlier applies: cut there many times until relieved by this cutting.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tried this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron needle according to this shape and with three points stuck into a splinter of wood
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move backwards into the bladder; then insert the probe gently into the penis until it reaches the stone; then turn the probe in your hand against the stone, little by little, until you can pierce the stone on the other side; then urine will come quickly, and then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is still inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it breaks quickly and comes out with the urine, then the patient is healed. And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread below the stone and another above, then cut the penis at the location of the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, untie the thread, cleanse the wound from the blood clots, and treat it until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	de la piere des femmes
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that a stone enters into women's urethra, and if it does happen sometimes, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: firstly, because by chance the woman may be a virgin; secondly, because one cannot find a woman who is well-informed and willing to uncover herself before physicians
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	**And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more hidden than the stone of the man, therefore a deeper cut must be made, and there is great fear involved. And if you should lack such [a person], then it is necessary that you take a midwife well-versed, and hardly ever will one find her, and if you do not find her, then seek any skilled mid-wife; and present to her a wise woman knowledgeable in the lives of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her that she perform whatever you command concerning the examination of the stone; and observe very carefully if the woman is virgin: then it is necessary for her to place her thumb upon the fundament and seek the stone; and if she finds it, let her press it down with her thumb, and recommend that she place her thumb into the vagina of the patient, and press and move her left hand strongly upon the bladder.**
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, then she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder downwards until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone in the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the penis, where it appears moved apart, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the cut be initially small; then insert the probe into the cut if you feel the stone so close to the wound that the stone can come out fiery, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	and know their similarities for knowing the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood becomes faint, then place crushed vitriol on the wound and let it stay there for an hour until the blood is staunched; then return to your work until the stone comes out fiery, and have tools that I have told you about in extracting stones from men to help you in your work. And if the blood becomes faint because of the artery being cut, place powder on the wound and compress it with bandages and linen cloths, do not recommence this again, and leave the stone alone without trying to remove it because perhaps the patient might die; then dress the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has been stopped, and the place is ready, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
de hernie carnouse	Here is the translation of the given text with a focus on the term "hernie carnosous":
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquatic hernia is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white seed, which is under the skin of the thighs containing the egg; and it is called "seed," and sometimes properly in the fabric of the egg, so that one might think there is another egg; and this happens if not punctured.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia comes from weakness that affects the thighs, and this matter becomes spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it occurs from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either declining towards jaundice, or colorless, black, or watery white; these are signs to recognize this condition, for if it is sac-like as we have said, then the abscess is ready, about the length of an egg figure, and does not open the joints, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess is ready with part of an egg, and thus it seems like another egg; but if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the sac-like area, one can feel it well. Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, use a square-shaped probe, the shape of which is shown above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	"Therefore, according to what comes after the introite, judge what is inside."
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we open it with an iron tool, the patient must be seated according to his ability and the fullness of his body; then let him lie on his back, supported on something slightly raised, and place many cloths beneath him. Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the probe towards one of the two ribs near the joints. Then take the spatula lightly and cut the skin of the joints among the long line near where the knife points, making the cut straight down to the sac-like white area, and scrape it subtly according to your ability. Then pierce the sac full of water with a wide hole, and drain all the water, then place your bandages, stretching the sac upwards; and do not touch the rib cage itself, but only the sac. Cut away all or in pieces the surrounding skin subtly, so that if you do not cut it cleanly, the water will return. And if the egg slips out of your work, put it back in its place once you have completed the work on the sac. Then sew up the two layers of the rib cage with a stitch, then heal it like other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, then tie up the vessels that are suspended there, stopping the flow of blood. Then cut open the lung at all the suspensory ligaments and remove the egg, treating it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if water is gathered in two parts together, know that these are the roots; then cut the other part evenly as you did the first, then squeeze out the blood, and place clean linen moistened with rose oil on the wound. Then place another linen moistened in wine and oil over both wounds, and cover it with doubled cloth, and tie it all according to this manner:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two strips of cloth, and fill them with wool lint according to this manner, and sew them together at the waistband of the breeches. Let one end rest on the buttocks up to the back, and the other at the elbow area; then tie both ends over the two angles, and let all the bandage be gathered in the loop of the breeches. And sometimes this root is medicated by cautery instead of iron cutting, so take a fine cautery scalpel, cut through the skin at the roots, and heat it as we have said, until the white membrane that contains the water is exposed. Then take the cautery in this manner, prick through that membrane once, and burn off this subtle cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	**And clip in all ways that you can, until you remove everything; and ensure the fire does not touch the eye; and know that this work is safer; and move guarding against bloodletting, and perform incisions carefully; and if anything opposes you, whether it's an abscess or bloodletting or other things, so treat what opposes you, according to what has been said before.**
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	**And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to undergo this procedure due to its unpleasantness, perform perforation as I instruct you; for when you are certain by the signs that we have said that there is putrid matter inside, then make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess at its lower part with a broad spatula and insert the trocar into the body's length; and make the hole wide so all the pus can flow freely; then place cotton on the site and tie it, leaving some space for the remaining pus to flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed; and if the bandage does not allow the pus to exit through the mouth of the wound, you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat dropsy, whose form is shown before; and widen the wound's opening, knowing that the pus will return and gather after six months or so, and when it has gathered as before, thus the patient will pass their days.**
de l’aposteme des coions	"On boil on buttocks"
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in cutting this vein there is danger and more often harmful conditions, therefore it seems better to leave it alone; and I will tell you the operation and its like of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	"I say therefore that many boils come on the body, especially on the buttocks; and this happens often."
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is known through sour and sharp acidity that spreads to the joints or percussion points; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; it does not cause pain, yet it is a severe abscess; sometimes one finds abscesses that are pale and thin-skinned with a reddish hue, and occasionally they arise from an artery or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, it is known by the hot appearance of the abscess when pressed with two fingers; and one must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	That which is made from a vein swelling is known by its appearance upon touching with two fingers, and one can easily perform an incision on this type of boil as well as others; firstly cut around the joints, then raise the edge upwards, and carefully remove the white core from around the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already hard with these new feathers, then you must draw out the egg and cut its head; and if it is air in the syrinx or in those that are inside the vessels, then you must release all of this tension and roundly cut the head.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	"And if the birthmark of the skin is in the hinder part, then it is necessary that you cut off all of it and remove the boil as we have said."
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when your procedure is completed, then fill the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then dress it with other dressings until it is healed."
de l’aposteme des coions	"On boil on buttocks"
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess covered with a wrapping resembling a boil, accompanied by softening of the joints; when the patient moves, it causes him to cry out. And the treatment for this illness is as fearful as the one mentioned above. Nevertheless, we shall tell you its workings according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must have the patient sit on an elevated seat. Then place the suspension band for the joints below your elbows, around all of the vessels close to the genitals, and stretch them taut. Cut through the scrotum with a broad, sharp scalpel across the vessels until they are exposed. Scrape each side as we have described in the extraction of arteries from the temples. Then insert a needle with double thread where the vessel first appeared and tie it at its first position, then tie it again on the other end. Cut through the middle straightly along the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moistures. Then treat the wound as others are treated when they have been wounded by an arrow, so that no vessels break open to nourish one of the testicles. For if all vessels become filled with blood, then it is necessary to draw out both testicles from all vessels, so that the seed does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and let them dry and be unable to help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	"Treatment for a broken nose:"
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrences of this ailment come from the cutting that occurs at the bladder or from the stretching above the belly in the area of the hip joints, which causes the intestines to descend from that opening into one of the hips; and this opening is either in the bladder or from the stretching of it, and these two kinds of causes arise often: from blows, jumps, falls, lifts of heavy loads, and similar things; and the sign when it's from the stretching of the bladder is that it happens little by little over a long time, not suddenly; and the abscesses are even unto the depth, for the bladder presses upon the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	"And the signs that it is a fracture of the nasal bone itself are that there is sudden pain at the onset, and there is diverse swelling apparent under the skin, due to the escape of intestinal contents through the defect in the nasal bone."
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	"And sometimes the intestines may descend with the fracture and become trapped in it, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed upon."
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	"And these fractures of the nasal bone require careful handling so that they do not happen frequently due to poor treatment."
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	The manner of this operation is that you should command the patient to insert their intestines by hand into the wound if they can reach it; then hold them on their neck between your hands and lift the thighs; then raise the heart above, and cut all the skin from the long bones; then place the tongues of the hip belt hooks according to what is needed to open the wound, and let them be such that the bladder may issue forth; then scrape off the bladder that is under the skin of the hips until the hard white bladder is exposed on all sides; then insert your right index finger into that which extends from the hip bone, in that which is between the white bladder that is under the skin of the testicle and between the second bladder, and separate that which is behind the testicle and between the second bladder; and then move your right hand inside the hip bone, and raise the white bladder upwards with your left hand, and lift the testicle along with all the bladder towards the hips; and command the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards and release that which is behind the ligature; and search with both hands if there is any intestines wrapped around the hard white bladder, and if you find anything, put it back into the belly beneath; then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the back part of the bladder, after the hip bone, then cut the ends of the threads that appear until there are four left; then gather them together in the manner of a cross and tie the bladder that we have spoken about which is under the skin of the hips with two strong knots; then wrap up the ends of the threads and tie them tightly on both sides so that none of the vessels may enter inside, lest an abscess come there; and put the knot again according to the first knot long two fingers from it, and after these two knots leave some part of the bladder that is under the hip bone for a handbreadth; and after all this, cut in the part that is under the skin of the hips until the blood flows, and the bowel as we have said above; then bring moist wool dipped in oil and put it on the wounds, and bring the ligature that we have spoken about.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	"And sometimes it may be necessary to cauterize the exposed nasal bone after the incision has been made in case of any bleeding."
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, leaving the joint until it falls by itself; and if it delays in falling, then be aroused with hot water, and place what we have said upon it until it falls; then heal the wound with another remedy until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Here is the translation of the given text with a focus on the term "hernie carnosous":
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this art I have never seen anyone dare to perform a cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done like the branch which is bound around the wrist, in such a manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting slightly above lightly on the underside; then cut in the middle, and heal the abscess that opens until the vessels fall; and heal it as we have said until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No wound comes from the angles, as we have said, and opens the place; and no intestine descends to the joints, but if any do descend, it is little, and repair all hours; and nevertheless if it remains too long in this point, the wound swells or becomes syphac, until the intestines descend; and this happens by the extension of the syphac that is at the angles, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swollen the place and opens; and its cure is by cautery, as we have before said; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner: And let the patient lie often on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the wound swollen with the width according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the syphac that is under the skin that is usual, then take the rod and put it upon the apparent place of the syphac; and press it deep into the belly, then cut the two apparent places of the syphac on the head of the rod, and cut one and the other; then extract the head of the rod, and do not cut the syphac nor extend the wound nor anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the intestine; then heal it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse it and heal the wound until it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The infection is confined, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization should be performed more gently at this place, and closer to saving the patient's life.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	Regarding the softening of the skin of the thighs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the thighs becomes softened in some men because the flesh that is inside is softened, and it is unpleasant to see. And it is necessary, when one wants to heal it, for the sick person to lie on their back, and cut off the softened skin from the natural skin; then join the two lips with a suture, and if you wish, first sew up the excess of the softened skin with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the sutures, and heal it as one would other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	Regarding castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	And know that castration is prohibited in our law, and therefore I would like not to speak of it in this book; however, it is necessary to mention two reasons for it: one being that the surgeon should be able to respond when asked about it and its cure; and the other because we often have need of castrating certain beasts to aid us, such as bulls, sheep, goats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method we use by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water until its testicles are softened and drooping; then grasp them with your hand until they return to their place and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Regarding castration by cutting: you must first tie the beast down, then press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then attach the suspender and cut each cord once after you have thoroughly scraped them. Leave a small piece of the spermatic cord and the delicate spermatic cord that is above the vessels. This method of castration is quicker than that done by attraction because no remnants of the testicles remain to cause the beast to desire lust. Then heal the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Heraphroditism occurs in two ways among men: one way is that between the two testicles opens also like the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes it dribbles urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way occurs in women: they have upon the pubic hair both like a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for both men and women is that you cut away all adjoining skin, and cure it as other wounds; but in the second manner, for those men whose urine leaks through the skin of the testicles, there is no remedy.
de la tentigene	Tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is an adjoining skin on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you shave the excess skin of the tentigene with your hand or scissors, and cut it lightly; but do not go too deep lest blood flow, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed. And there is another skin that grows at the mouth of the womb, the armpit, and sometimes breaks out in pustules, resembling a cow's udder, hence the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you bind it, as we have said regarding tenting, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	Erratique
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	The womb is irregular if the nature of the woman is not pierced, or if the opening is small; and it is either congenital or acquired due to illness; or it occurs due to adhering flesh, thin or thick membrane, and it extends deep into the marrow, or on the sides, or below, wherever it may be; and it prevents conception and childbirth, sometimes also preventing menstruation; and its diagnosis is made by examining the womb.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the inflammation appears nearby, then seek it in your two ears or in your throat.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is due to thin membrane and it appears in both hips, then act swiftly as follows: place your two index fingers together, with the woman lying on her back and her legs spread; then press the two hips firmly until the thin membrane is taut and covers the inflammation; then take wool soaked in oil and apply it to the spot, and have the woman lie facing down each day so that it cannot dry out.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the shoulder blade is hard and thick, then you must cut it like a bay leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is flesh-born, suspend it with garlic and cut it; and have medicinal bandages to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense mixed with egg white; then apply a broad bandage of lead so that the wound does not heal; and do so for a long time, applying a clean linen cloth; then treat with other cures until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when flesh-born matter comes in the wound, it must be cut according to this manner, unless it is an incurable abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an incurable abscess that is in the wound, one should not cauterize with fire.
des emorroides	Emorroides est une maladie de la partie postérieure de l’anus et du périnée, causée par une dilatation veineuse ou un hémorragie de ces veines. Les symptômes incluent le saignement lors de la défécation, la douleur dans la région anale, et des masses dures à cet endroit.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are abnormal openings of veins, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard. We have already said in the division their similarities, signs, and now I will say those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are buried deep in the marrow, and they cannot be felt, then there is no cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the anus, which can be felt, those can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you must place the woman in a cold house, then stretch out the piles with forceps, and cut them at their roots, then apply powder containing medicines that constrain blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood incense, and similar things; then place her feet against the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, then seat her in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall nuts and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and celery seed, and make a plaster with it to apply to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if she bleeds, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, apply cupping glasses to the back and breasts without cutting; then take linen, moisten it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply it to the location.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is ripe, treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called 'albathir' is red, and resembles a harsh head, so it should be covered as I have said above; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Of boils of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess occur in the martyrdom (i.e., the genitals), such as chancre, pierced abscess, herpes, erysipelas, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in their categories.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I must discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that occurs in the genitals, which is not one of those that boil; and if you wish to know how to work with iron, look to see if the abscess is aggravated at the beginning of its appearance, and filled with heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hurry to pierce it, but make it enter until the pain subsides. Then have the patient sit on a seat, and arrange two small seats for them to lean on, and support their back and assemble their feet towards the thigh; and let their thighs be spread apart, and put their arms under their knees, and tie them securely with a good tie. Then suck the bag towards the right side, and bring the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the wound, about which there will come later its form. And it is necessary that when you prepare this instrument, you first insert the rod to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters does not go deeper than it should, and does not injure the patient. And if the instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the wound with bandages, so that the instrument does not hurt. And it is necessary that they place the horn of the instrument above, and wet the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and it is cut with a soft hand, then it must be covered at its head, on the left side of the spatula; and when the bowel is empty, then you must put moistened tents into the wound in rose oil or dry green oil; and place the tent far from the wound at the bottom of the marrow, and place behind it on the marrow and on the linen cloth moistened with water where mallows have been cooked; then after two days of suitable ointment, until it is healed; and sometimes the marrow and the wound are raised by an enema of water and honey, and then water in which lily roots and long celery have been cooked; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is in the marrow, you must beware of cooking with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary first at the birth that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman hurry downwards and desire to smell the aroma: then the child hastens to come out; therefore know that this birth is according to nature's figure, and the head appears first, with the membranes along with it. And when you see these signs, then press her belly gently so that the child comes out quickly; for when it descends on its head, then the membranes are with it, and the marrow is cleansed of its superfluities by good cleansing. And he who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Sometimes it happens that it comes upon his feet, and fire comes to the body or shoulder, and the hands, or it comes upon his belly, sometimes, and is turned by chance over his neck, and in other ugly shapes; therefore, it is necessary for the physician to be wise and subtle in these matters, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the forms how one should help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes on its head through natural issuance, and the woman labors with grief, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool, or let women hold her; and arouse her nature with oil of olive or fenugreek cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs the little spatumile of which here is the shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the amniotic sac, and scrape with its nail until the moisture inside comes out; and take the belly of the woman until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then one must give the woman an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil. Then make her sneeze with condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will be born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out first, then you must gently push them back little by little; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high. Then tilt the seat down onto the ground, and hold the woman so she does not slip during tilting. And if the hands still cannot enter and the child dies, then cut the hands at the joint that is mentioned here, and extract the child, and reset them evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the birth of a child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out onto its feet, it should be pushed up; then gently turn it little by little until it is even; then take one of the feet and stretch it gently little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it jumps up to its hips, instruct them to hold it and make it sneeze with some condition; if it jumps afterwards, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he cannot jump as we have said, then turn it bit by bit until it is in its natural shape
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easy
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have said, then take musk from a mule's head, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all together in one mortar; and put this ointment on the woman's nature, then let her sit in warm water up to her chest; and when she is moistened underneath, put a collyrium of myrrh under her and leave it for an hour; then let her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will come out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the outlet of the child onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, then the midwife puts her hands softly and gently; then she supports it on its neck, and its feet hang down, and it lies on the bed; and folds its hands softly and gently, and then places its hands on its belly, and removes the pillows underneath so that it hangs down properly; and if the child does not slip out, then take its feet and move it vigorously, then move its belly upwards, then place your hands there; and ease the child out softly and gently; and tell the woman to push until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the outlet of the child who comes from the thigh, keep one hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to attempt to replace the hand: if it cannot be replaced, then make the woman stand up and walk away. If she cannot walk away, make her lie on the bed and bend her legs vigorously; then prepare the musciliary as I have described; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, then attempt to replace the hand. And bring out the child according to its natural shape, and make it sneeze, and command the woman to push until the child comes out properly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the outlet of the child on his neck, with his hands spread out and his face turned towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the bath attendant take his hand, then turn it little by little, and wipe it gently; and when it is even, then put on the natural musk of aloe and oil, as we have said, then command her to move little by little; and when you have done this, then make her sit on the seat, and command her to sneeze; and let her yawn.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for all the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When heat comes in this manner to the entire amniotic sac, then cut the amniotic sac with your thumbnail until all moisture is expelled; and if the child's face and neck are bent, then cut from the chin so that it is not retained, and the child dies. Then place the child inside, so that you have put it in as it ought to be, and command the woman to push several times: then it will come out easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the outlet of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, although it happens rarely
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	There are two strange things that do not live unless given a name; I know of these, which can be multiplied, and are desired by the Sybil who divides them, which is attached to the chin. Sometimes they also come out naturally like everyone else, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out screaming, treat them as we have said, and let the surgeon be skillful, and do quickly and easily what she does; and do thus as it is appropriate to move towards health.
de plusors enfans	Of several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	At times they are formed in the uterus I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or even more up to XV, and all are formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the sagacious sage, and it is necessary that the surgeon knows all this, for by chance such things happen; so act accordingly as it is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	Of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman for a dead child in the womb, as I have said in the division, and if nothing comes out, and you are constrained by necessity to use your hands; it is necessary that you know whether the woman is of sound virtue, and does not have an accident or fears death; then the woman must be propped up on her back, and her head inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the assistant should tie two cloths around her, or she should be tied to the bed so that she does not slip during the delivery of the child; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oil containing musk, aloe, fenugreek, and linseed, then the surgeon should coat his hands with these oils and musks; then insert them into the womb gently, then choose one of the places where it is customary to place the hook, and be careful that the child descends headfirst; then insert the hook into its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or near the genitals or close to the ribs, and if the descent is on its feet, insert it under the buttocks and midway along the sides; and it is necessary that you hold the hook in your right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of your left hand, and gently press with your whole hand, and insert the hook into any of these places that we have mentioned, until you reach the empty space; this is the shape of the hook.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then thrust against the other bone, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction is even; then stretch them evenly by moving from one side and the other, for easy removal, and let the bones' teeth hold for movement.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some part remains, then the surgeon applies some of his two fingers with oil to that part and presses them in, and draws out the other part; and if none remains, then place this bone higher up and continue until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to stiffness, then you must wrap the cloth all around it until it goes out completely; then cut at the joint of the sole or on the side, and do the same for the other foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and stuck at the exit, or has a sharp-pointed bone assembled there, then you must insert the spatula between your fingers, cut the bone, and remove the point; or grind it with the tool called "almidach," of which the form comes with the tools in the chapter that follows this one; and do the same if the child has a large head naturally. Then pull out the bones with forceps, and if the head still sticks and is stuck by force, then cut until the moistures exit from the hip joint; and if it cannot come out, then cut piece by piece as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	"And if the child is on its feet, then traction is easy, and directing towards the mouth of the matrix is also easy."
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is stuck in the belly or breast, then you must pull it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and cut open the belly or breast until the moisture that is there runs off; and if the other members are removed but the head remains, then place your hand deep into the wound, and draw it up to the mouth of the wound; then insert one or two fingers, and pull it out firmly; and if the mouth of the wound is constricted by a hot abscess that has come there, then do not work on it, rather bring moist and fatty things, and with those plaster it up, and soak in softening and moistening waters.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is lying on its side and you cannot make it lie flat, then treat it as we have said for a living child; but if one lacks power to do so, then pull it out by pieces and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the conditions that we have mentioned occur in wounds; and if flows of blood come forth, they should be restrained with water, and other treatments should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman whose womb contained an infant that had died, then another infant became lodged on top of it and also died
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, she developed inflammation in her vulva which swelled so much that it opened up and began to emit a foul odor
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat her, but after pondering for a long time, I could not heal the wound
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attracting plaster and an bone emerged, then after several days another one appeared
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly astonished by this, for the womb has no bones
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I concluded that they were bones from a dead infant
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and pulled out many bones until the woman was much better. The woman lived a long time like this, but sometimes a little bone came out of its place; and I recorded this chapter for this reason: whenever masters find something strange, they should know how to apply aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	"to bring the dislocation back into place"
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the shape of the presser, to which one applies the books; and at two turns for each of the two heads of the two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle for the restraint and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the wood should be two fingers wide, and its thickness two fingers, and one and a half palms long. And there should be two joints of this same wood between them, which are fastened at both ends, half a palm long or a little more; and these two joints are placed in the mouth of the wound to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling the shape of forceps; and it should have two heads with two joints each, about a palm's length long and two fingers wide. When you wish to open the mouth with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, with her feet dangling and legs spread apart. Then insert the two heads of the instrument together into the mouth, holding the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs. Then open your hand fully with the instrument, as you would with equal-sized forceps, according to how much you wish to open the mouth of the marris (vagina), until she is satisfied.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	"These instruments are all mounted, and their appearances are multiplied. When the surgeon has prepared them, the operation is performed more quickly, and the instruments are taller for men because of their size."
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	"Do not disdain the instrument until you have prepared it, for its necessity is not excusable."
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the woman to hold her breath, then make her sneeze with condimentum (an aromatic substance), holding your hands over her mouth and nose. If she coughs as a result, all is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, then take the pot and make a hole in its lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marble vase into it, such as calamint, rue, anise, camomille, cassialigne, and centory; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water in the pot over the fire; then place one end of a cane in the hole of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marble vase, and let it steam until the vapors come into the vase; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	"If the membranes are expelled quickly."
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if after this treatment she remains and does not sneeze, then command the maidservant to wet her left hand in sesame oil or in musk from almonds, and then insert it into the vase, and search for the second part. And when she has found it, grasp it gently and pull it out straightly, so that the marble vase does not fall during extraction; but it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then pulled out. So it will come out and become loose.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the womb is too narrow, we have said the cure for sneezing and fumigation with herbs. And if it does not improve from all that we have said, then ensure you do not cause harm while treating; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the womb be tied to the woman's hip, then perform a clyster with tetrafarmacon oil. She will be able to urinate and pass through, and there will be heat. But nevertheless, when she does so, an unpleasant odor may come from the stomach and head, causing injury to the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	"Therefore, suitable fumigations must be used for this purpose. None of the ancients have proven fumigation with watercress and dried figs."
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	"The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman during the retention of the flowers and membranes is as follows:"
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it resembles the skin of a dog, and one places the head carefully over the fire, with wide-open jaws. And let there be fumigation on the coals, until the tinder is wasted, then begin again.
de percier lou fondement	"to pierce the anus"
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born whose anus is not pierced but plugged by a skillful surgeon. Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this syfac with her finger and not cut with a sharp instrument, and guard against touching the wound. Then place moist wool soaked in wine and oil on it, until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	"And if you doubt that it has not healed, then place a tube of lead in the opening and leave it there for a few days, removing it when the child is ready to be taken to its room."
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	"Sometimes this obstruction occurs suddenly due to a wound or an abscess; it is necessary to cut off that growth: it should be cured as we have said for the lead tube."
de la fistule dou fondement	"of the fistula of the anus"
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come beneath the fundament are nodose, and swellings that come alongside the fundament defected, or in the space of the two parts, so there is one fistula or many; and when this nodosity is ancient, it acts up, and increases moist heat, causing white or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas are persisting; and they are known by those who see them exit with evacuation or windiness when the patient makes evacuation, and sometimes one appears.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	"And there are fistulas that pierce up to the bladder and up to half of the penis; and they reach up to the hip joint and up to the knee."
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula at the fundament, and not persistent; and it is that you place your two index fingers on the fundament, and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, then insert a thin reed of lead or horse hair until you feel the reed or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, nor does evacuation or windiness come from the hole, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; so hurry to heal.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	"And when the fistula is perforating up to the bladder or up to the urethra, urine comes out of it and cannot be healed by medications."
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it pierces through to the hip joint, then the tendon comes all the way there. If there is no torsion and inflammation does not spread around, it will pass on its own; there's no need for medicine or immediate ointment in such fistulas. Only labor has power over them, and vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In those fistulas that are not yet persistent or old, there is hope for healing by iron. Thus, have the patient lie face down in your hands on their back; lift their legs up to their hips and tilt them towards their belly. Then insert a red-hot iron rod, or one of lead if there's torsion, until you find where the fistula comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around their anus, you must insert your two index fingers into it. If you feel that the fistula has pierced through there, uncover where you sense between your fingers the opening or flesh. Then know that it is persistent; do not work on it unless you can heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	People say it's possible to heal some, but this happens rarely. The aid given there involves heating the cautery iron according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned; and inserting it hot into the fistula until it reaches near the fundament; do this twice or three times until you know that those broken tissues have been burned, which resemble a bird's feather; then treat with soft bandages moistened in butter until that charred tissue falls off, then treat with ointment between skin and wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is healed thus, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this does not heal otherwise; and if the bandage enters but does not pierce to the fundament, and there is a thick layer of flesh or skin between your two fingers and the bandage, and you see the fistula through that covering on the heart side; then cut from the beginning of the fistula, and immediately push the bandage forward, and then apply the cautery until it reaches the head of the bandage; and the bandage will be released, and it will fall off; then scrape away those burned tissues which resemble a bird's feather, leaving none remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	"If the sinew breaks and tears between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or strong medicine."
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery brings together two things: namely, the burning of these adjacent hairs, and the extraction of blood and the drying of moisture; then treat wet wounds with butter or crushed plants until the wound gapes open, and have burnt hair removed from the wound; then treat the wound with rubbing ointments to penetrate hard flesh, and these are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	"For when it is cauterized in this way, it is truly cured and does not return."
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	"And if the fistula comes right down from the fundament and is far from the body, push your thumb into the fundament and search for it."
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the wound, and between two there is cloth or skin or hair where it is about to burst, then let there be fire only with trust and hope, by administering one of these three ways: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut until deep, or if you cannot do so put ointments on it and treat it as before; but do not go too deeply lest you cut the tissue that holds the fundament, causing unwanted evacuations. Then treat it as we have said. Perhaps it will be healed, or you may remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut near the fundament, either with ointment or another pointed instrument. Then clean the torn skin in the wound as much as possible; then strive to close the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament: this will make things easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: when you insert a tube into the fistula and it is located on the side near the foundation of the skin above, then take another tube pierced at the top like this:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	"And tie one end of a thread to the top of the tent, then insert the tent all the way into the fistula until it reaches its tip."
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it pierces into the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that hole so you can insert your finger into the foundation. Then pull the head of the thread and bring the two holes together, tying them tightly to each other and leaving them for one or two days. Sometimes tighten again until the threads cut through those tissues that are between them and fall off. Then heal the wound until it is closed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	"If the fistula does not burst open on its own, make it do so by any means you can, unless it is too deep."
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"For it would not be good to cut too deeply and then treat it as we have described until it is healed;"
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spine-like instrument used to open a fistula is very sharp at one end and cutting, but not at the other end, so that it does not cut what should not be cut, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	"hemorrhoids"
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: those that are inside the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they constantly emit blood. There may be one or more, and some are defecated along with feces while others are expelled from the anus. But those that are defecated have a little moisture, and sometimes they emit a little yellowish water or a little blood, having the color of flesh. The treatment for those who have hemorrhoids inside the foundation is to advise the patient to strain themselves while going to the bathroom until the hemorrhoids come out, then grasp them with forceps, or hold them with your fingernail, and cut them at their root. If they cannot be held due to moisture, take them with a piece of cloth or cotton, or with a piece of chamois leather, and remove them using both hands, then cut them and apply some warm powders in place of cauterization; or cauterize them as mentioned in the chapter on cautery, until they are healed. If the hemorrhoids cannot come out, then cleanse the patient with a strong and sharp clyster to wash what is inside the anus so that it can come out freely. When the patient strains and if the hemorrhoids have come out of the anus, the treatment is simple: grasp them with your fingernail or forceps, cut them, then heal them as we have said, until they are healed and there is no fear of incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should stitch according to this manner: Take one thread of wool, and pass it through a needle, then pull the thread upwards and make the needle pierce from the other side, and twist both ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide; and tie the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one to correct the superfluity of blood; then place upon the foundation one cloth moistened in rose oil or wax, and place it upon the foundation, and instruct the patient that he rest; and then let him lie until they fall out, and when they have fallen out, then treat them with ointment and other treatment, until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	"For the drying of the fissure in the fundament:"
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	"Often times a fissure occurs in the intestines due to drying, and this can happen naturally or when the patient is old and medication is ineffective."
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must first scrape off the bark using a sharp tool or your nail so that it does not become moistened. Then treat it until it is healed as necessary. And if it cannot heal, then begin scraping again more vigorously than before, until it is completely scraped and healed. Then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	"For trembling:"
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Little ants appear before the body, and go very deep; sometimes they are felt cold, and the shivering is perceived like death coming into all the body, more so in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	The cure is to take a quill of goose feather or a strongulture feather, and place it on the shivering so that the circle encircles the shivering entirely; then turn your hand around the entire feather until you grasp all around the shivering, and push it deep inside, and remove the shivering from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	"And if you wish to do this with a feather of brass or iron, then do it in this manner, and make sure that it is thin underneath and sharp above:"
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	"Do not pierce too deeply so as not to hurt the fingers or cause them to bleed. And if you wish, cauterize the trembling area, just as it is described in the chapter on cautery."
de la forme dou clistere	"Of the form of a clyster:"
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	"Sometimes a clyster is made of silver or lead, or molten brass or wax; and sometimes they are made of these small or large instruments, according to their size."
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	"Therefore, those that are used for the treatment of children and those who are weak and sickly should be small;"
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	"The form of a small or large clyster is as follows: wide where the belly is bound according to this manner:"
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And there is a discomfort where the belly is bound and pierced from within; and it has two holes on one side, and one hole on the other; and the belly where medicines are placed should be made of an animal bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be one span of space; then put a strong thread of twisted hemp through these holes in an X shape or wound around them, and gather the belly like a goat's stomach; and when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong string at the front, then administer the clyster.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medication not be too hot nor too cold. Anoint the head of the clyster with oil or donkey's wool, or something similar, then insert it gently; then the servant squeezes it with both hands until it is entirely empty, then remove the clyster and have the patient raise their legs at the side, and if the medication wishes to exit, let it do so as much as possible; and if it remains overnight, that is greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you perform a clyster in an illness where the belly is inflamed and the medicine rushes out quickly, then repeat it until it is healed."
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or on an abscess, let the clyster be as subtle as for a child. This is the form of the thin clyster on which the skin should be stretched:
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	"We have already discussed in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines according to their fulfillment."
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and what they are made with."
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by stone impact and cuts from sword or knife, lance or club or dart, or similar things; or those that are made according to the places on the body, such as a wound falling on the neck, head, face, belly, liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, you should be mindful whether it was caused by a blow from stone or similar objects. If the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the raising of a hot abscess: then rinse it immediately with cold water if there is any blood flowing from the wound; let the rinsing be on the opposite side of the injured part. Ensure that the patient has fasted from wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it will not rinse, then thin down his diet and let him abstain from wine and meat. And place upon the wound, if a hot abscess forms, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine. And if there is no hot abscess, then apply powder (which I shall mention later) to the fresh wound, ensuring it does not become inflamed by exposure to air; and if inflammation has already occurred, then apply ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like one from a sword cut and similar ones, and its lips cannot be brought together by binding alone, then bring them together by stitching, as I shall say regarding wounds of the belly, concerning stitches.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone and hangs open, barely attached, cut it off; then treat the wound with medicine and replace hard skin in place of leather, instructing the patient to eat substantial foods like testicles, cooked wheat, also poultry and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rottenness in the leather and it has no attachment to the bone, cut off all the rot and throw it out, then treat it; and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that does not stop bleeding without a bandage, locate the artery and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then their care is easy; you should place in this powder which binds before the art has moved it
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind them finely into a powder, then fill the wound with it and press it firmly until it blends well and joins with all its blood; then bind it tightly and do not remove the medicine until the wound is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	Sometimes heat alone is applied when incense or dragon's blood are not available, but only after the art has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved, especially in summer, do not apply this powder but instead use some digested ointments or poultices made from barley flour, water, and honey until it weeps; then heal with other remedies until it is clean.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone fracture accompanies the wound and it is small, extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you later about head fractures.
de la plaie dou col	"of the neck wound"
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	"If a wound comes on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut."
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave it alone and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat; and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medication be warm, such as warm water washed in honey and mixed with rose oil, and cooked vegetables also washed in warm water, and other similar medicines according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the wound is large, then suture and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals."
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is swollen and full of bowels, then pierce it lower down; and if the artery is cut, and blood flows abundantly, then drain it, tie it, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the heart, and the windpipe is guarded, by which the flesh goes, then hold the heart over the canal of the neck, and do not touch the neck but reset it according to its natural shape; and then bind it tightly, and leave it for a few days, then cure it with drying ointments until it is healthy; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then scrape it out; and if there are pieces of bone, throw them all away if you can, and those that you cannot have, leave them until the wound rots, and let the sore be drained and closed up; and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	"And if there are bones and fistulas in the wound, then treat it as I said in its chapter."
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	"on wounds from a lance or a dagger"
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a lance or knife and the wound is deep, then observe if wind escapes from the wound when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal. And if it is not deep but fresh with all its blood, then do not apply powder at the first hour nor bind it so that the blood does not go deep to the heart and kill the patient; but apply attracting ointment, binding twice a day. And if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound for three days or four or more. Then there will be no spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart nor restraints on breathing. And when you see good conditions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Therefore treat it with dressings and other treatments until it is healed. And if it cannot heal but opens again, know that there is a fistula; treat it accordingly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a cut made by a sword or knife, and it is simple, whether on the chest or back, then its treatment is with what comes before; if it is large, with stitches; and if it is small, with powder. And if it has eaten into the bone, and has pieces of it, then examine the wound, and treat any displaced splinters if they are exposed; and if they are not exposed, allow the wound to fester until extraction becomes easier. The judgment for other wounds on other limbs is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	"on rupture of the abdomen"
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And the rupture of the belly can be large, medium or small. Sometimes a large wound causes the intestines to protrude, or a piece of intestine to come out through it, making stitching difficult. A smaller wound may sometimes be worse than a larger one because, when sewing, one must carefully place the intestines back in little by little; but sometimes they swell up quickly from the cold and slip back in more easily. And know that there are four ways to suture the belly: two common sutures happen during abdominal surgery, while two others specific to other wounds on the body occur elsewhere; but these are still most commonly used with abdominal suturing, each of which I will explain and clarify.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestines has been cut off, and it seems difficult to reset, this can be done in one of two ways: either because the wound is small, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it up in this manner: moisten a sponge or one cloth with lukewarm water only, or cook in boiling water cinnamon and cumin and spikenard, and apply the intestines until the swelling is removed; and sometimes do this wine restraint, and it should be moved with care to desenflame.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling departing, moisten the intestines with water or old honey that has been cooked, for by this the entrance is enlarged little by little; and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with the instrument used to remove hemorrhoids; and the first cure should be gentle, so that no one cuts without great necessity; and this is the instrument for splitting: cut inside the curve and do not cut deep, and here is its form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines leap out, then carefully replace them according to their natural form in their proper place if you have the power, for this is worth more.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the part below the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and chest higher than the lower parts, and likewise if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, so arrange it that the wounded part is higher than the other; and thus should be arranged for both large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	In small wounds, do thus: first prepare what you have at hand, then take a pitiful helper who carefully takes hold of the entire wound with their hand and brings together its lips; and this is the common way of stitching. Take one or more needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave two threads of thread from the beginning of the wound, and insert a needle with a strong good thread into it. Pierce both heads of the skin with the two heads of the sinew that is beneath the skin inside, until you have pierced them on this side, and gather together the two heads of the sinew with four together; then tie a double thread around the needle on both sides, then join together the two edges of the wound neatly, and leave two threads of thread, and insert another needle into it. Then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and continue to do this according to how many needles you need, until the entire wound is closed; and let the needles be medium, between fine and coarse, for too-fine needles cut all the flesh, and too-coarse ones cannot enter very well: therefore they must be medium. Do not stick the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before it has healed; then cut off the heads of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient while sleeping, and put lint or bandages on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed. This way of stitching with needles is more useful for small wounds, because it suffices with one or two needles. The second stitching method is common: gather together both heads of the skin and both heads of the sinew with a needle that has a strong medium thread; and when you have pierced these heads all four together, then bring back the needle to the part where you began, in the manner one sews cloth; and put the thickness of a finger's width of thread between each stitch. This stitching is known to men, and I once sewed up a wound on a man's belly who had been cut with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's length long, and the intestines were coming out well two palms' lengths, and the wound was in his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I reset the intestines after it had been twenty-four hours since the blow, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, which I dressed, and it remained healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	The doctors had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle. I did not dress the wound with any ointment or medicine because there were none available where I was; instead, twice a day I applied old cotton to the wound and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	I will tell you the two proper ways to suture: Take the needle and insert it from the outer part until it pierces the heart straight through. Then take the thread on which you inserted the needle, and make it pass through again from the inner part to the outer part. The purpose of this stitch is to sew like a furrier sews furs, leaving one side of the thread once before taking it up again on the other side until the entire suture is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of sewing, which Galen discusses distinctly, is as follows: some people join the two parts naturally together and apply one end of the sinew to the other in this way: insert a needle into the nearby end of the muscle, pierce only that spot, leaving both ends of the sinew; then turn the needle and pierce from the outside towards the inside at both ends of the sinew; finally, pierce both on the outside going towards the inside through two other nearby muscles on the opposite side. This is the correct manner of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this word, and some witness it: one must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread; one needle should be placed on one side, the other on the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew hides. Know that when the wound is inside the belly, the stitching is more urgent than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is like that of other wounds: when you find the wound fresh with all its blood before it has moved, put back the intestines and close the skin; then place powder made from boiled grass on it, and if it has moved, apply some ointment available until the wound closes. Then stitch the wound, ensure the threads are sound, and dress it with bandages and compresses. Then treat the wound like others until it heals. If you don't have medicines, put cotton wool on it as soon as it starts to close, and move it twice a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	But in many cases where wounds are simple, you have no need for other medicines. And if you doubt that the wound communicates with principal members, you should moisten light linen in warm tempered oil or rose oil and place it around the angles and under the armpits. If there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which happens often, wash it out with hot black wine enema. And if putrefaction reaches the intestines, pierce them inside and know that when it's the large intestine, it's easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	Injuries to the intestines called 'jejunum' cannot heal, due to the thinness of their vessels and the delicacy of the entire body, and their closeness in nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the nerve jumps out of the wound, put it back in place immediately after the intestines, while it is still fresh; and if it is old and turned black or greenish-black, you should tie off the area that is black to prevent any blood flow, because there are veins and arteries there; then cut away what is between the ligature, and place the two ends of the nerve hanging down from below the wound until it falls out to facilitate extraction.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the bowel
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, as I saw one man wounded in the belly with a lance; the wound was to the right of the stomach, became funnel-shaped and turned into a fistula, through which digestion and wind escaped. I treated it according to what I could, and did not cease refining until he was healed, and the places joined.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it soldered, I doubted that the patient might have evil in his belly; and there was no evil, but remained in better dispositions, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when it has a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: take frogs with large heads, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the frog has opened its mouth, put it on the two lips, so that it draws its mouth open; and then cut off the head, and this holds so that it cannot untie itself, then put another frog afterwards in this manner that before, until the wound is entirely covered; and close the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	These heads also happen in the intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal, like this: take the head of this intestinal string that is very skinned, and then tie at the head of this string a thin twisted linen thread, then put the string into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and join it in the opening; and this manner of sewing with frogs is no further than according to the way of trust and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is neither device nor healing, but only thinness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	"whether it is a fistula or wherever it may be,"
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it grows large, is universally called "fistula," and likewise when it becomes hollow and sinks inward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is truly a ruptured and whitish nodule, where no pain is felt, and it is also hollow like the feathers of a bird; sometimes clear and deep, sometimes thick; sometimes small, sometimes large enough. I have already spoken about this in the section on wounds, that any wound which does not heal has flesh only because of one of nine causes: namely, either because of the smallness or badness of the blood or body, or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that does not allow flesh to form, or because there is too much depth, or the location is putrid, and the material is of poor quality, or the medicine used in treatment was not good, or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature, or because the property of the region is tardy in digestion and slow in healing by nature, or because there are veins or bones present. I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and their remedies for medicines in that section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	"Now it is fitting that I tell you about the cure of fistula which is done by manual work:"
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas which come from the great veins, and the arteries, and the nerves, or to the spleen, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and there are such that come to the property of the principal member, and to similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of grievous healing, and there is nothing else but labor, and ignorance; and if there is any fistula which does not come to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know well how to recognize it, then take a tent of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, so seek it; and if the fistula is crooked, so search it with a subtle tent of lead, for lead bends more around the crookedness; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot search it well with tents, then cleanse it through one of the openings, for moisture will pass from one opening to another, and cleanse it. Then seek it with your power, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and how deep it goes, and ask the patient well about the pain they feel at the pressure of your hand, and where they feel it. And when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut it according to what I have said, and remove the fault and the corrupt flesh that is inside; and then cure it until it is healthy, and if the fistula is very deep on the right side, then you must cut deeply, as much as you can, then put moistened tents in hot water medicine, and place them up to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrode the superfluity that remains at the bottom. Then put healing ointments made from fresh meat, until it is healed. And if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupt because of the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerve does not trouble the principal member as we have said, and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then wait until all the corruption is removed, then treat the surrounding flesh until it is clean; and if it is not clean, and still bows like before, know that you have not gone deep enough: uncover and search until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore it to its place; and if it is thus cleaned, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	But if not, know that the corruption is too deep, and you cannot reach it; so there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature. And if there is a small corrupt bone, and you can grasp it with tongs, then extract it with the appropriate instrument for this purpose, and if there are many bones, then cut them all, leaving none behind. And if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, then cut away the moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place something irritating to rot on the wound, and let it remain until the flesh is entirely rotted around the bone, and then they will come out more easily; and if it's a large bone like that of the leg or thigh, then continue removing only the corruption until all blackness has been removed, then restore the wound; and if there is much corrupted part reaching close to the bone's marrow, then it must be cut down to the corruption, and then heal it until it is sound; and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in one man's leg, so that you may take example and help from it in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was once a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg from some cause that came from within the body so much that matter reached the leg and swelled with a large abscess, but there was no opening to release it. But physicians through their folly opened upon the abscesses too much, and corrupted many materials, and it became a fistula, and many holes appeared which all flowed bowels and moisture from the body; and many physicians cared for him around two years, yet none skilled in the art of medicine were called until I was summoned, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they treated him, and what flowed through the holes in great quantity. The young man's body became red, and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, then searched all the holes, and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then hurried and cut into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, which I found to be corrupted and perforated, with corruption reaching to the inside of the bone. I scraped off what appeared to me of the corrupted bone, believing that there was no other corruption besides what I removed. Then I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but it would not heal. Afterwards, I began again and discovered the bone as before, finding that the corruption had continued into the bone. I scraped it off and then removed it, intending to mend the place. But even after cutting around about a palm's width of the bone and removing it completely, I could not succeed in mending it. Then I treated it with medicines again, and it became sound and healed quickly. There was no need to recommence the operation except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the purpose of bloodletting was often performed, but he was entirely healed afterwards, and in place of the bone a hard flesh grew, and he was of good disposition and had no harm nor contradiction at all, neither oncoming nor departing.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be done in this manner: take linen and tie it at the head of the bone that is open, and command someone to stretch it upwards; and place another thicker linen bandage over the first one, and bind it on the flesh that is above the bone, and pull the rotted flesh below, and uncover the flesh where you see fit, so that the bone does not wound the flesh; and place a hot iron or a heated brick under the bone to move the rotted flesh away; and this should be done as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and it should be done again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is decayed and does not appear, and the decay is in the middle or in one part, uncover all the flesh; then place a brand underneath, and then sew from one side to the other the decay, and let the sewing be as long as the decay of half a foot, as we have said; and if the decay is at the joint, cut off the decayed joint, and sew the bone where it contains on the other side; and if the decay is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other choice but to cut; and if the decay is at the knuckle of the hand or at the knuckle of the foot, that thing is very difficult, but nevertheless you must examine this corruption how it opens; and cleanse it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or the nerve does not oppose you; and know that the instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance outside, and their thickness and their fineness, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare for each type of work its instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument that you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of illnesses; so consider the instrument that you need according to what is necessary.
dou feu	Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head rots away either from within or due to lack of use; and when you have treated this decay with medicines but they are ineffective, then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to the point where the decay begins, so that the patient escapes death or the greater evil of loss of limb. The sign of this is that the limb turns black as if burned by fire, and afterwards, after the blackening, the decay spreads from limb to limb, affecting the whole body; so you must act quickly. If it is due to the bite of venomous creatures such as sea scorpions or snakes and similar ones, if the decay starts at the tip of a finger, amputate there but do not allow the decay to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, amputate at the joint so that the decay does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, amputate at the elbow. And if it passes beyond the elbow, death is certain, and there are no remedies powerful enough to save the quantity of its strength. And this is how it goes when decay affects the foot: if it reaches the first joint, amputate after the next joint; and if it reaches the foot, amputate the whole foot. And if it spreads up the leg, amputate at the knee joint. And if it rises above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die. The manner of amputation or cauterization of the limb is thus: tie it above and below with two cloths, one downstream from the lower tie and the other upstream from the upper tie, then cut away the flesh that lies between the two ties with a wide-bladed knife until the bone is exposed; then amputate or cauterize, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the cautery does not touch the healthy area and cause further injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if blood flow comes while you are working, hasten to cauterize the place with powders that restrain it; then return to your treatment until it is complete; then bind the wounded limb with an appropriate bandage and tend to it until it heals.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No boil ever comes on delicate flesh and stays so long that it forms a large swelling; then it grows round and pierces through, and the bowels burst forth, leaving the place empty like an earthen vessel. The skin above is as thin as a silk cloth, not reaching to the bone or nerve, and such disease is called 'sain', not 'fistula'; but if it stretches so far that it reaches to the bone and goes deep, then it is called 'fistula'. And the treatment for this is to cut around that skin, even if it is thin like a silk cloth; yet do not be afraid of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you believe that the skin is hardening and corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cure it thus by irrigation: examine if the breast is large, and the bowel that comes from it has a foul odor. Then use Egyptian medicine made like this: Take aloe, oil, and lead ointment in equal parts, and cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey. Then take some according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and use it for irrigation, inserting it into the breast and closing the opening. Leave the medicine there for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; do this many times until the breast is cleansed and the foulness removed. Sometimes use water from ashes for irrigation when Egyptian medicine is not available. Take ash from burned grapewood, add water to it, let it cool, and use it for irrigation until you know that the breast is well cleaned. If the patient cannot tolerate this, nor Egyptian medicine or water from ashes, then use water and honey for irrigation with a little crushed lead ointment added; or use honey mixed with wine, where the honey has properties of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the wound harden. When you have done this, and believe that the breast is well cleaned, then irrigate it with something that produces flesh in it. Take diachylon plaster, melt it with rose oil and wine, or use other medicines and ointments whose properties I have mentioned when treating ointments. If the opening of the breast is small and the tube of the irrigation cannot enter, then enlarge it slightly with an iron tool, insert a tampon of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it becomes enlarged. If the wound is too large, then sew it up and leave only enough space for the irrigation to enter. If the opening that emits bowel is above, then cut below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the bowels are deep, do not let any flesh enter; and if you cannot cover the lower side of them as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowels move to the lowest point where they are. For when the bowels are deep, do not let any flesh enter, and if you cannot cover the lower side of them as you see fit, arrange it in this manner: let the bowels move easily downward, and leave nothing of the bowels; and take consolidating medicines to put on the skin, and stretch over it a linen cloth that covers all the skin. Then cut against the entrance of the breastbone about one fingerbreadth wider than the first. Then gently apply ointment onto another cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it on the entrance of the wound to alleviate the bowels, and do not remove the large outer cloth until after many days once; and that which is on the entrance of the breastbone, often remove it to remove the bowels, and know what comes out from the bowels, whether it's venom or little or much, or digested, or undigested. And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not. And when your medicine has been applied in this way and you see how it acts on the entrance of the wound, then know that the breast is already healed, and approaches health. And then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unwrap the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	"And if after many days the breast still discharges undigested bowels, know that the breast has not yet healed."
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons are contracted after a long time, do not despair of health, for recovery approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	But there are people whose flesh in their wounds is slow to heal, and those who do the opposite; and if undigested food jumps from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach has not emptied itself; and if the stomach is slow to empty, and is distant, apply drying medicines of dry substance and virtue, such as diaphanous ointment, for it contains much vitriol, which is the last medicine; take diaphanous ointment, and they make it with rose oil, and rose vinegar equal in substance; then cook it and use it; and this same thing does better cooked honey when diaphanous ointment is not present, or you can take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, grind them, and powder them on the honey while it is on the fire; then put it on a cloth, and place it on the stomach, and sometimes administer long aristologue, and roots of celestine lily, which is also like flour of wheat and barley; and use simples or composites: grind them, make them into powder, and put them on the honey that I have mentioned, and use them; and if the cure is prolonged, and not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption has gone deep, and has made an impression on the bone, or on hard members, or on ligaments; so the cure for fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the boil of the fingernail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the thumb of the hand, or the toe, or sometimes arises in other toes; and when it becomes old and is not taken care of, then there comes a hard, running, and weeping abscess that runs so far as to reach the root of the nail, and sometimes reaches the entire nail; and the corruption reaches down to the bone, such that there comes a foul-smelling pain, and the head of the toe becomes swollen, and its color turns yellow.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all, then you must cut away with iron all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is greatly helpful if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound; but if the nail presses against the flesh and begins to prick and fester, then you must place a blade underneath the nail that pierces the flesh, and lift it up, and cut away that subtle and tender flesh gently and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh to remove all of it; then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it and draw out fire, for as long as the rotted bone remains there, it cannot heal; and if you see both rotting, cut it at one of its ends just as was said earlier, then treat it until it is healed; and if it is wounded and inflamed, causing great pain, you must first heal it; then cut off the claw of the thorny spur at an angle across it, and make sure that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the claw, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, put something on it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain in the wrist
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that are sometimes found in some men's hands by chance are entirely fleshy, and sometimes there is bone or claw, and sometimes they arise from the root of the joint, where the birth is on some of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born with any knot of the two does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the two sometimes moves; the waist of one who is fleshy is light in this manner: cut him at his root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those that originate from the root of the joint are difficult to treat: hold down and cut off.`
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In him who is born with a hard knot at the shoulder, first you must cut around the flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable knife, and then scrape it until it is clean.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The scabs that come on both toes together are caused by birthmarks or scars from wounds or burns or similar things.`
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You must cut that union so that the shoulder blades return to their natural forms; then place between two wet cloths or oiled rags soaked in rose oil, so they do not fuse together; or place between two thin pieces of lead until the place is healed as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If scabs come on any of his toes with the palm, cut off that adhesion as necessary;`
des vils	of the wicked
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Wounds are large veins filled with melancholic excesses that come from various parts of the body; and they occur more in legs of those who walk and work and carry loads than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you should administer to him sometimes a purge for the colon, and then treat it with the basilica remedy.`
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cautery with iron is done in two ways: one is that you cut them and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you raise the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting is done in this way: first raise the leg with very hot water until the thick blood becomes thin, then hold the leg of the patient down from above the hip to just below the knee; then cut the vein at one, two, or three places with a wide cut, then lift and draw out the black blood by hand from one end to the other, as much as the patient's strength can bear; then tie it, and command that they bind with fresh black colophony; and resume evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, which harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The raising of the veins is done in this way: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell; and if you have no bath, heat it by the fire, and then cut near the vein at the long end of the knee, or below the ankle bone; then cover the skin with oil, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears when touched; and it will appear red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord; then place the hook underneath so that it lifts the skin, and then stitch it lightly to an ointment, then cut in another place three fingers up; then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with the hook as you did before, and stitch it to another ointment, then make another cut if needed, then lift and cut at the two feet, then draw it out and lift until it is all drawn out, then cut again; and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then insert a needle with strong doubled thread, and tie and draw it out, and place it under the hook, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; and make sure it does not cut, for if it cuts, it cannot be drawn out or lifted, and harm will come to the patient; and when you have drawn it all out, then put moistened wool in wine and rose oil on the wound, and dress it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the sinew is contracted and twisted and enfolded together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly but do not sever it completely, and pull it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron used to cut the sinew is curved and does not cut too deeply, so as not to cut into the vein; it should be thickly curved, for if it were thin it would cut into the vein, but let it be thick as we have said; this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is embedded in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land with no moisture; sometimes it grows elsewhere besides the legs, and this happens due to rot that comes from under the skin, as it happens inside the body with serpents and worms, buried between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that there appears a very large inflammation on the leg, then the location changes, and the vein starts to protrude like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the thigh opens, you must wrap around it a piece of lead from three to two inches wide and tie it on the leg, letting the lead hang down. Each time it leaks at the front, wrap the lead around it again and retie it. If it is too long, cut off one part and wrap the remaining piece, but do not cut it near its root lest it enter the flesh and cause an abscess or corruption in that place, resulting in a bad disease. Therefore, it should be treated gradually up to its head, leaving nothing on the body. Sometimes this vein can stretch five palms long or ten, and once a man came to me whose was ten palms long. When you cut it, insert a knife into the hole and pierce it all the way down so that everything comes out; empty the material inside and bring healing medicines to apply there against corruption for several days before treating it like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and there are many perforations from which blood flows profusely; treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cattle sickness," because it often affects oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body moving up and down, and can be felt well as it moves from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and leaves a trail of pus; and it is caused by corruption of some humors, like worms, serpents, tapeworms, and roundworms in the belly; and its evilness is doubted, because when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it can go to the eye, sometimes entering it and destroying the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it curing and drawing forth, then one can only do so when it goes: thus, it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong bandage very tightly. Then cut upon it and draw out the worm, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it can run into the eye, as we have said. And if you see it coming near to the head or close to the eye, press down tightly on it from below with the eyebrow, then cut upon it and draw out the worm. The patient must use bodily cleansing with dissolving medicines for corrupt humors and eat fresh foods that are not rotten.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	due to pain caused by windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called in our land " vakkir ", and it is a pain that comes into certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb. I have seen this with my own eyes.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and soon after, I saw something like a worm rise up to the shoulder, quicker than anything, like quicksilver when it moves from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later spread throughout her body, so that she felt it in the other arm; then she told me that she was continually turning around her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	"I wondered greatly how she could move thus from limb to limb because I had never seen this disease behave in such a way."
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I had often seen pain move from one place to another, but never as clearly as I saw it in this woman; and I thought that perhaps the reason was because she had dry skin and visible veins, which caused that constrained windiness to appear; and those who are moist-skinned with concealed veins do not appear thus.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain which we have mentioned, then hasten to apply a plaster above and below, and then cut until that constraint wind escapes from its place; cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it with your eyes, then use remedies that relieve winds, such as fetid pills and pills of serpentine, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	"Sighs are various according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they occur."
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The varieties of them are such that there are those which have large points, and small, barbed, and smooth; and those which have two angles, those with tongues, those with fragments; and those which fall into any limb fall in one of two ways: either into a principal limb, such as the head, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls then into any place of these limbs, and the signs of death which I will tell you about appear: then you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for many deaths follow afterwards; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of an arrowhead when it falls and pierces the bone, and bursts forth the blood that is on the head, is when there occurs scotoma, soddenness, exertion, and redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes there is bleeding from the nostrils or ears; and sometimes one loses speech and voice; and there appears from the wound white moisture resembling feathers, and there also occurs burning of flesh; and if these signs appear to you, then take care, and remove the arrowhead if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of an arrow striking the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck into something hard, not empty; and sometimes the arrow moves like a feather, and black blood flows out, and coldness and cold sweat come on, and fainting occurs: then know for certain that death follows.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	"The signs of a sigh that has entered the lung are that foam comes forth from the wound, the throat swells up, the patient changes color and sighs loudly and asks for cold air."
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	"And if the sigh enters the covering of the lung, it is near the ribs. There will be much wheezing and great pain, with loud sighs; all the shoulder limbs move."
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	"And if a sigh falls into the stomach, sometimes undigested food may emerge from the wound."
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	"And if a sigh falls into the abdomen and much wind rushes out through the intestines, there is no hope for recovery or for drawing out the sigh."
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	"And if a sigh falls into the bladder, urine flows forth and there is diarrhea; the patient feels great pain. You should know that the wound is mortal."
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	"The other limbs such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary limbs, spine of the back, forearm, thigh, and similar limbs are safe according to various conditions."
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	"When a sigh is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous (as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do likewise),"
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one that an arrow struck him at the root of his neck; I attempted it and drew it out from beneath the fat of the ear, without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	I drew out an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye beneath the skin, and the arrow was lodged deep; only its tip could be reached towards the wood; it was large like a Turkish bow, made entirely of iron without ears; the eye was healed, and no ill happened to it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian; it was Arab-made with ears; I cut off the barbs and carefully removed it until it came out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I drew out an arrow from a man that had fallen into his belly, and I thought he would die; but after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change; I cut open the arrow, engaged it, and pulled it out through force, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to help the man upon whom an arrow has fallen on his back, and the wound has healed over it; and the arrow remains within him, and does not change its natural position, nor find harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you wish to help another man upon whom an arrow has fallen in his face, and the wound has healed over it; and he remains thus without suffering great pain; and many others similarly.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And an arrow struck one of the king's servants in his nose, and it fell into his nostrils, leaning somewhat to the right side; and the arrow was entirely buried when I was called for treatment after three days had passed.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I felt around with all care and did not find it [the arrow]; and he felt pain and discomfort under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought that it was the tip of the arrow. I placed plaster with digestive poultice on the place to prevent inflammation; and the head of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I placed my hand over the wound for many days, and reopened the healed scar, and thus the patient felt the arrowhead inside his nose on the first day; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed corrosive medicine on the wound for many days until it opened, and tested it, feeling the tip of the arrowhead pressing against its place; then I applied more of this medicine to the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow became clearly visible; and after about four months had passed, the wound healed over so much that I could not extract the arrow with forceps; therefore, I did not cease to refine and devise various tools until I finally extracted it one day using well-made forceps, according to what is described at the end of this chapter.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I therefore sutured it, and the wound healed completely, leaving the patient entirely well.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Now I have told you the qualities of extracting certain arrows, so that you focus your care on what I do not mention, for books cannot encompass everything; but a wise master examines even small things, and finds new works and new tools for dealing with unusual events in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows exit from the limbs where they are stuck in one of two ways: either through the point where they entered or through another part; and those which come out through the point where they entered are called flesh-piercing arrows, and sometimes remain sticking.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, let it be until the flesh is softened around it and the exit wound is eased; and likewise if it is stuck in bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for a few days, moving it each day; and then it will come out, and if it does not, then carefully cut around it with a fine knife until the surrounding area is widened, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: then do not pull it out, but let it stay there for a few days until it becomes even, because if the arrow reaches so deep, death is imminent.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not reach too deep, and the patient remains for a few days without bad symptoms, then attempt to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if it is very deeply implanted and cannot come out, then apply poultices around it as I have told you; then treat the place until it is healthy."
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is buried in the body so that it cannot be seen, then search for it thoroughly; and if you feel it, pull it out with some appropriate instrument. And if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves or veins involved, then cut the flesh until the wound is large enough. Then pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are barbs on the arrow that prevent its removal, cut away some of the flesh around it, two parts on each side that you can reach, and then break or bend the barbs so that you can pull out the arrow; but be careful not to break the shaft as you pull it out.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then wait until the place around is properly prepared, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood opposes you, follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter; and beware of incising the nerve and the vein, and devise how you can gently pull out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the position they were in when the arrow struck them, for that is the greatest help. If you cannot do this, then place them according to what the signs indicate.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	An arrow that comes from another direction, where some part of it is visible or the skin around it is swollen and can be seen or felt: cut there until you can grasp it with forceps, then pull it out: it will come out more easily now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then resume extraction until it comes out completely; and if the shaft of the arrow is in place, remove it together with the shaft; and if the shaft has broken off and you wish to administer a counter-incision, introduce the surgical instrument carefully so that the tip of the arrow enters into its groove; then push it through, and if the arrowhead has entered the bone, introduce the instrument backwards into its groove to aid extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrowhead has entered, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if possible, then treat the wound as it ought.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls into the foot or belly or bladder or side, and it is nearby, then cut upon it if you can; but guard against cutting the vein and the nerve, then extract it, then suture the wound if necessary; and tend to it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat bones is similar to a bird's beak, and here is an illustration of that shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the bone fragment.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like the feathers of a bird, for driving into the point of the arrow, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	Here is the shape of forceps for grasping and pulling:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins from which bloodletting is performed, of which sixteen are on the head: two branches after the ears called 'dous herbech', and two arteries in the temples; two veins in the corners of the eyes called 'aspires'; one vein in the forehead; one vein at the nose's tip; two jugulars in the neck; two veins above the mouth, known as 'augeherich'.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins commonly known are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it runs along the right side, which unlearned people call "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fast", composed of the cephalic and the basilica, which unlearned people call "vein of the heart"; and the basilica runs on the left side, which unlearned people call "vein of the belly", and it lies above the elbow pit, being that which is most openly apparent at the fossa.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, having II branches; and in the leg and foot are III veins: one runs beneath the curve of the left elbow pit, and the second saphenous which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg are III veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The veins that are behind the ears help in ancient purging and bleeding. The quality of the bloodletting is such that you should raise the patient's head and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth. Then, make the patient strain their neck with a vise, until both veins appear behind the ears at two dependent points on the head. Then feel for the pulse under your thumb, and seize it. Next, take the lancet and insert it under the vein up to the bone. Then raise your hand along the vein upwards, and cut through the skin and the vein well across with two fingers' width, and make blood flow out as much as you can see. Then bind and compress it until it stops bleeding; I have already spoken of the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bloodletting of the two arteries that are in both temples is beneficial for ancient purging, sodomites, and customary ophthalmia, and for the course of tears from the eyes. And this is how it is done: make the patient strain their neck until both veins appear clearly. Feel for the pulse under your thumb, then seize it firmly. Then raise your hand on top of the vein with your index finger, and insert the lancet underneath, raising the vein upwards and cutting through it as you did with the other two veins. Let blood flow according to your necessity. Then release the patient, place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton and compress it firmly until it stops bleeding; we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding from the frontal vein is as useful for old facial diseases and migraines as the cephalic vein; its quality is such that the patient strains their neck while twisting, until the veins appear; then take the tool called "fossor", of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein and press down with your hand or something else, allowing as much blood to flow out as you desire; then untwist the patient's neck and tie off the vein until it stops bleeding.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too narrow, and tie it diagonally, because the bone is close by, and sometimes the flame breaks when it is too thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding of the two veins located in the temples is beneficial for the eyes and against epilepsy, redness, inflammation in the eye, and facial diseases. Its quality is such that the patient strains their neck while twisting, just like before; then bleed them and let the blood flow diagonally, a bit long but not too wide, as there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is too thin, it may break. Then apply pressure to stop the bleeding, until you have enough blood. Then tie cotton on top and tie it tightly.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The veins of the nose are useful for fever, and sudden frenzy, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is chronic. And the qualities of the veins are such that the patient strains their neck, then strains their nose towards your left hand, and takes a long, subtle flame, and inserts it between the lips into the space that is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow; do not go too deep, let the blood flow according to your need, then leave it overnight, for it restores quickly. And this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The veins of both arms help with the extraction of bile, and the beginning of mixing [medicines], and many diseases, and measles, and corrosion, and herpes, and skin conditions. And the qualities of the vein are such that the patient strains their neck downwards on both sides, as we have said; then let the master stand on the head of the patient, who sits on a chair, then cut the long vein a little wide, then draw temperately blood or as much is needed, then do the same in the other vein, then tie the thread and hold gently between the veins so that the patient does not strangle; leave it until morning, when the wound will be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the healing of bodies
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	"The juice of the veins of the lips above aids in coldness in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and fissures of the lips, and nose and around."
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of healing are such that you should have the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which are recognizable by their black color, and by the small black veins around them: therefore cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, then cut the largest from each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for they are one and the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the healing underneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The healing of the veins that are underneath the tongue aids afterwards the healing of the cephalic vein, and it is for the tightening of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth. The qualities of the healer are such that the patient should sit between his hands before the sun, raise the tongue, and look underneath on each side for a black vein: cut both of them, but do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The blood vessels of the arm are commonly opened in two ways: either by pricking with a wide-mouthed lancet, or with an olive-shaped sharp one called "anesil", depending on the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	"The shape of the mirror blow is very well known, and is wide as you see:"
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary for opening hairy veins filled with visible thick blood that contain thick and turbid blood; this is the shape of the olive-shaped lancet.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	"And it is more pointed and fine, and is for letting the veins that have thin, lemon-colored blood."
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The bleeding of the basilica vein, one of these veins, helps those who are ill in the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen. The bleeder must bleed profusely and beware of the artery that lies beneath it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery and blood flows copiously, then it is necessary to staunch it as I said; and the lancet must not be pointed but sharp like an anesil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilisk does not open visibly, then you must remove it and replace it with another; or if you wish any vein of it, or if you heal in place of it the vein within the arm: it opens visibly; and the tip to the burning flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you know how to recognize the location of the vein, then beforehand remove the arm, touch the location until you feel the pulse; then mark the location from above, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with the burning flame; and be careful that you do not strike the artery when you see the location swollen, for that is the artery: avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see something coming out above like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery: act quickly then, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens; bind the arm then, and leave it thus, and do not let the patient move it; and be fearful, and do not let them move until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	"And if the bleeding does not stop and he faints, and there is no doctor present, then cut the artery if it appears, for its head contracts; and stop the bleeding."
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of fig bark, cut it open, and take one half and tie it firmly in place until the next day. If bleeding stops, that's good; if not, treat it with powders that stop bleeding, as we have said before. The application should not cause harm in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The wound in the middle of the vein helps by drawing blood from above and below because it is composed of basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said before. The surgeon must be careful not to injure the nerve that lies underneath, especially if puncturing too deeply, which can cause swelling, injury to the sinew, and possibly even prevent healing. This nerve often becomes exposed, but in some men it remains hidden due to its fineness. Therefore, you should treat it with an instrument called an Ansel, and press on the nerve as strongly as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	"And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it lengthwise;"
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The bleeding of the cephalic vein helps, for it draws blood from the head, and aids the eyes. It is best to bleed using the olive or myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, it is important to find the easiest place and not be discouraged if one fails at first; one can try again. Sometimes the spot may swell in some people when bled for the first time, but it causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	"The quality of letting depends on your judgment."
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is only performed for the sake of maintaining health and preventing future illnesses. Bleeding should be done in one of these three veins located on the arm: the cephalic, basilic, or median cubital vein. It should be done at the beginning of Lent, in autumn, and in winter after a meal when signs ofpletion appear. One should bleed on the first or third day of the month, two or three hours after noon.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The sick one who is given medicine for illness has no fixed time for it, but when there is need by day or night, at all hours and at all times; and one must not give medicine to children until they are fourteen years old, nor to a woman carrying fruit except from the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the elderly over 60 years of age receive this medicine.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wishes to take medicine, in whatever manner it may be, then one must first purge the intestines with a light enema if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw out the harmful superfluities from the intestines into the principal members; nor should he who is too full of food or drunkenness take medicine until he has fasted for some time. And one must not give medicine after a bout of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, menstruation, hard labor, waking and fasting, or anything that depletes all virtue, either from a blow to the weapon or body. Then subtly refine the humors with foods and drinks and medicines if you have the power to do so; then enter into a bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood; and let him take medicine from the vein at the elbow on the third day as we have said; and guard that day from labor, hunger, lust, and similar things. Be tied down and joyful, and may the sickness be higher than he who is being sickened, and rub his arms twice or thrice, then hold the lien tightly in the middle, for if it is too tight or loose, then the blood cannot flow correctly; then moisten the medicine with a drop of old oil, then place his thumb from his left hand on that vein beneath where he wishes to take medicine, so that the vein may rise and swell at the striking.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee like strings from the bloodletter, and some such are filled with windiness so that when one places fire on them, they withdraw from the fire and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with many; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, therefore the bloodletter must be skilled in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens on the first attempt, that is good. But if not, then begin again a little below or above that place immediately, if the place is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the place is swollen and the patient fears it, let him wait one or two days without tying the arm: perhaps he will have a boil come out; do not enter into baths then restart the bleeding if it pleases him; and if the hole is small, or the blood comes subtly and you doubt that it does not flow much blood as you see, then apply fire to that same hole directly; and work quickly before the place becomes swollen for this happens often when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the wound swollen, do not recommence the cautery, and put a bit of oil ointment on it, for it lightens the body's blood, and in this place the oil's balm is most effective; and so administer oil ointment in each cautery that you perform on veins, to staunch the flow of blood; and the same effect has turpentine and bowels of ox, when placed upon the wound.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess appears, which happens often especially when the vein was not cauterized well at its first opening, then hurry and place a warm compress of sponge moistened in water on it, keeping it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood flow from the vein has stopped. If blackness or greenness remains on the wound after some days, don't worry about it; but if you see fit, apply something made from aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mastich, or similar substances.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an ulcer and appearance appear during the administering of basilica: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft under the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore be sure not to apply anything that we have spoken of here, for perhaps some blood will flow from the artery; but make one plaster dry to harden the place, and then cleanse it with another cleansing until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw off the blood according to each person's constitution and the color of their blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it issue forth until it becomes red. And if it flows thickly, let it flow until it becomes more subtly flowing. And if it is too hot, let it cool before striking again.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, that a wider cut be made, and the flame be wide; but for one who is weak, do the opposite, and they should be pricked frequently and gently, and this should be done by incising rather than puncturing; and this method of bleeding prevents excessive loss of blood and damage to nerves, and it is better than long or wide pricking.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body fails to bleed properly, give them dough moistened in pomegranate juice; if they are hot, let three or four bloodlettings be done; and if they are of cold temperament, let them eat before the bloodletting dough moistened in musk syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and sweet-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if they faint during bloodletting, after losing much blood, then they must inhale broth of meat, and fragrant subtle syrup, and use the other things that we have spoken of in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to evacuate one arm and have bloodletting done again afterward, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he be bled a little at a time according to his continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to evacuate one arm after the first bloodletting and has a strong body should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to have bloodletting done on another part of the body should be bled on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Because there is much blood within the body that is already heated and causes fever; therefore it is necessary to draw out a large quantity of it, and widen the opening so that it flows freely into a basin. Then, after you have prepared all the conditions for healing, and place your hand on the pulse when it heals, ensure that the patient does not come in place of the basin, which happens often if the attendants are negligent; but it is not necessary to tighten the loop around the arm, nor to press strongly the second time when the opening has closed. If the arm is bent, let it extend quickly for it would be bad; but wait until it heals a second time. Or you can cauterize with the tip of the flame so that the blood which is congealed at the mouth of the vein flows out. Then place some salt mixed in water on it and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	"But if the vein is swollen, do not let go nor squeeze too hard until the inflammation has subsided."
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	"And if it becomes necessary to draw blood a second time, do so either in the same vein or in another one, or even in the other arm."
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	"The vein in the arm is opened in place of the vein in the head because it is more accessible."
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of the cautery is that the patient puts their hand in warm water until the vessels become red; then it should be bound moderately so that the vein appears well. Then the cautery is applied across, not wide nor long. And let the opening be large. And let it be cauterized near the joint of the hand. If blood cannot come out, put the hand back in warm water and let it bleed into the water until you have enough. But if it's summer, do not put the hand back in warm water, for one puts it more often in winter than in summer. And the cautery of this vein is safer than all others because there are neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The cautery for the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver. And this is the manner: constrain the hand and put it in warm water until the vein swells and can be seen. If you cauterize across and cut all around, it will not harm anything. But do not go too deep, because nerves are underneath all bones devoid of flesh. Then put the hand back in warm water if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	"And when you have drawn enough blood, apply oil and a little salt to quickly cauterize the wound, and do this for each cut."
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	"The bleeding of the vein in the left hand is beneficial for those suffering from mumps, and it should be done in the same way as I have described for the right hand."
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The juice of the soapwort is beneficial for all illnesses below the body, such as those of the womb, retention of fluids, and diseases of the spine, thighs, and old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its juice are that the patient boils some of it in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it reddens, and then binds it over the ankle joint. The vein is located at the ankle, and many nerves go up the leg from there; therefore, apply it to where the largest nerve is or at the ankle, as this works best.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	"And if you bleed on the foot, beware of the nerves that lie beneath. Make the cut across, like cutting a slice; and let the blood flow freely."
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	"And if blood cannot flow out, immerse the foot in water again and allow the vein to empty completely."
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the juice fails on the first application, then try again a little higher up, as the place may be salty. Do not fear damaging a nerve, as we have said, and apply soapwort to the other leg in the same way.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	"The location of the sciatic vein is on the outside ankle, and bleeding it is beneficial for lower back pain when caused by hot blood."
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of its juice are that the patient enters into a bath and holds up their foot with four fingers twisted behind the ankle, as otherwise the vein will not open. And if it opens, then apply the juice in every way you can, including across it. It is better to tie it off afterward because the place is rough and many people have tried this method.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then take any vein that opens on the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and let the blood flow as much as you see, and then untie the bandage, and place cotton and bind it; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	And regarding the applications of cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	"Leeches are made from horn, glass, or earthenware and can be used in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking."
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping that is done without cauterization is of two kinds: either it is done with fire or without fire. And cupping that is done by cauterization and bloodletting is performed in fourteen places on the body, among which one is entirely on the forehead; another is in the neck; two others are on each side of the neck; one below the chin; two on the shoulders; two on the hips; two on each arm; two on each leg; two on each ankle. And cupping does not draw blood except for the small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and thus it does not weaken at all, as is done with veinletting. And it should not be administered in any disease caused bypletion, until the entire body has been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary to bleed due to illness, or for customs, then we will do so each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at all times; for there are those who, when they need to be bled, have a heavy head. And there are some who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness before their eyes. And some who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and have an swollen tongue, and bleed excessively. And there are those who dream, and see by night blood and wounded and dead people and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	"And when we see these signs, especially during the month, we will order them to be leeched three hours after noon."
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the veins helps with headache ..., which comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this be done after evacuating the entire body; and this bleeding takes the place of bleeding from the head, and those who are of cold complexion or have a cough should not use it, for it does great harm to them. And therefore old people should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	"And those who often bleed themselves become forgetful. Therefore, the leech should be placed a little lower to avoid forgetfulness."
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The windpipe among the neck is in place of the health of the head and the basilisk, and for that reason it helps in the stretching of the arm, and in splitting open the channel of the lung, and in thirst and in fullness; and there one should put little pressure, for if it holds too firmly, it causes obstruction to the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The windpipe between the two ribs of the neck is useful for pains in the head, and for inflammation of the eyes, migraine headaches, strangulation, and pains at the roots of the teeth; it replaces the health of the basilisk. You must command the surgeon that he press his hand gently while placing it, so that he does not strike an artery or cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	"Windings under the chin are good for mouth disease, gum decay, and similar mouth diseases; and they are located at the entrance of two lips."
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	"The shoulder windings are good for diseases that come from heat and swelling."
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windpipe from the ribs is as useful as the three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from those large veins. Command the surgeon not to strike too deep with his hand, for the place is bare of flesh and has nerves and arteries beneath it.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass placed on the buttock is useful for hemorrhoids and lower diseases, and the cupping glass must be large and made of bronze, so that it can draw well; and sometimes if it is too fine, it may break and cause large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping glasses on the legs draw openly because they attract blood from all over the body and are useful for old pains in the kidneys, sciatica, bladder, and joints; they replace two sophenes and two ankles, but they also weaken the body after prolonged use and cause swelling in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cupping glass is as follows: first apply it empty, and suck moderately, then place it quickly and move it evenly without stopping until you see the skin turn red and swollen with blood visible on the surface. Then remove it and replace the cups, taking care to observe the condition of the body because some people have thin flesh and tender pores, so you should strike only once, make the wounds wide but not too deep, and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time. And when we want to draw only a little blood at a time, one stroke will suffice.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want much blood, we begin often; and if the blood is thick, let it be heated deeply, and its end should be such that the heart is suddenly pierced, and it suits those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you oil the places for cups of aperitive and dissolvent oil: if it's in summer, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucurbit seed oil; and if it's in winter, of cress oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excessiveness is thick and cold, use almond oil or balm oil or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if it is for one who has tender flesh and wide pores, then no oil should be put on, but it should be washed afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or water of morelle, or water of cucurbit, or water of porcellain, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture should rise using this method: with myrtle water or sumac water and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluities rise from old wine or water of succus, or decoction of fennel or camomile, or others similar; and it is not necessary to bleed before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and he should not sleep after bleeding, and it is necessary that he warm himself when he must be bled and when he is bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And let those who are bled be careful if they become choleric, and if the blood is too hot and inflamed; then it is necessary that they take cold things, such as pomegranates and endive and lettuce with oil, and similar things; and eat few pulses, and castrated meat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have cold complexion should take honey syrup and medium perfumed wine, which is between old and new, and eat little meat, and few pulses and small birds and poultry; and on the day when he will be bled, he should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men sometimes treacle or musk before or after bleeding, to strengthen the main members; and let the blood be subtilized, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Ventouses placed without striking are those placed on the liver, and the womb, and gout, and on the belly and the chest and the loins and the haunch; for these limbs do not suffer being struck upon, nor is it done otherwise than to draw blood from limb to limb, as we place them on the breasts when milk is abundant; to remove the viscidity that is in the limb, as we place ventouses on the belly and on the chest to lessen the limb; and it removes pain, when there is obstruction or stone, it may by its attractive virtue draw away the obstruction, or dislodge the stone from its place; and thus it does when placed on the liver and on the womb when there is retained windiness, and these ventouses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the ventouse with warm water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and it should have around the middle one small hole, like for putting in a needle, made of brass, softened beforehand so it does not wound the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle it should have a transverse rod of brass or iron to hold an enclosed candle, and there should be both large and small ones according to the illnesses and the size of those who use them; for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the elderly, and of the thin than the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must place this cupping glass on the limb thus: light the candle of wax or flax and put it inside the cupping glass through the rod that is within the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient; and then place it on the limb, and ensure that the two fingers are over the hole we mentioned earlier, so that when you wish to do so, steam can escape through it, and remove the cupping glass; and again apply the flax as before, and repeat this often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping used for the disease of pleurisy, which is acute, there is no wick nor hole, and it is not filled with fire except when it is full of air, and it is placed on the member alone; and that is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	The uses of leeches are not filled with fire except in members where one cannot place cups due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in places devoid of flesh, such as the toes or nose, and others similar. And the qualities of using them are that when you find leeches that are in clear, sweet waters without corruption, then take them; and put them in a vessel with sweet water until they become accustomed, and have nothing in their bellies. And then let them be veined and cupped, then rub the member until it becomes red, and place the leeches on it. And when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where one can put a cup, then put it there, for this is very useful afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this is not the case, then lift the joint thusly, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the joint bleeds too much after the body of the veins, then moisten a linen cloth in cold water and put on, until the blood is stanched; and if the blood is multiplied, then put on crushed vitriol or saltpetre, or similar things, until it is stanched; or you can place half-peeled broad beans on the joint, and leave them there until they absorb into the joint, now it will be stanched; and if more are needed, take others.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the veins do not want to stand out, then rub the joint with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until some blood comes out, and then place them on it, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will absorb; and when you see that they fall off, sprinkle some powder made of aloe and ground celery seed, or ash, now they will stick.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	"Here begins the book of fractures"
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	"This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the treatment of fractures and dislocations."
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know this, dear son, that foolish physicians cast aside this chapter, having never seen any of the old books nor read a letter from them; and for this reason knowledge has been lost in our land, for I found no good one among them; and I know nothing except through the knowledge of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science therein, and by experiment and practice in my life; and I have briefly described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and at the end I have summarized it, and clearly shown the forms of instruments arranged as follows, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	"It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the contents of the words and chapters where wise men place their understanding and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others."
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or contusion occurs in anyone, you must quickly warn the patient on either side, if any other condition does not prevent it entirely, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; or if the time is not very hot or too cold; and avoid eating cold things, that is to say, cold foods, and meat of birds and hares, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty meats, and do not overfill oneself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you doubt heating an abscess or spreading matter in the limb; then let the patient return to his former regimen.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	"And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the sick person be nourished with foods that cause good growth and are moistening, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pears, apples, cow's milk, eggs, fresh fish, and similar things."
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	"For with this nourishment muscles grow back more quickly and the fracture heals faster;"
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of the elderly and decrepit cannot be fully reset or healed properly due to stiffness of the limbs, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of young children; but treat them gently, bind the broken bone with strong plaster, joining it together until it is as firm as before; do not cut away any of its point, and therefore it must be nourished with substantial foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	"And know that fractures are diverse in many ways."
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	"For the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures."
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	"There are fractures that occur suddenly, like falling from a horse, and others that occur gradually, like the splitting of a feather for writing."
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	"And there are fractures with wounds, and fractures with only a small crack."
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each manner has its own device and appropriate tool in healing, according to what the memory brings back to its place; and bone fracture is known by the twisted position of the limb, clearly apparent by touch, and heard when pressed by the hand; but if there is no twisting or sound upon touching, and the patient feels little pain, then there is no fracture; however, it may have a twist, crack, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	"So do not move him by hand, but apply the medicines that come later and then gently immobilize him."
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the break which goes into a tree, and are the two parts dislocated, it is necessary to set them together evenly before the wound closes. And if the wound closes quickly, let it be for some days until the wound heals; then set it evenly at the joint where you can move it easily and know that the restoration of this one is easier than those with fractures. Then hold it steady as is appropriate hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken into pieces, stretch it from two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or use your hand for small members, or use two strings, or one string and your hand. And place the member according to its natural shape so that when the broken parts of the member are aligned, join them with all strength and keep the additions in their places while you move it until they are healed, and make sure that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and join the two ends of the bone together in the best way.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	"And feel it well with your hand if it seems not to be properly set: then raise it carefully and do not immobilize it too much nor press upon it as those do who cause hot inflammation and contracture in the limb through their improper handling, as we have often said."
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, ensure that the patient does not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning nor in any other manner; and make sure the limb is securely fastened so that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And when it feels no pain, then it is not set right, and you must position it so that it feels no pain; and make sure it is set straight so there are no twists when it is reset; the qualities of the broken limb depend on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	"Know that fractured limbs are diverse in size, length and shape."
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	But for small limbs, such as arms and legs and the like, they must be wrapped in soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as thighs and calves, must be wrapped with a wide and strong bandage, for the wide bandage embraces the entire limb equally on all sides so there is no slackness. Then bind it around with light pads, three or four turns depending on the limb, and hold your hand firmly on the entire bandage. Then go above the break and tighten less, so that the break can be slightly separated. And loosen the bandage bit by bit until you grasp a large part of the healthy area. Then take another bandage and wrap it around again over the broken area. Then return to the bottom of the break and tighten moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said above in the first binding. Then place between the bandages pads of linen or cloth until it is entirely even. Then bind all with a bandage from above and then place well-made splints on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place a soothing, warm poultice that reduces inflammation, and leave it on for several days; then apply pressure with your thumbs, using something like half of a large cane stalk soaked in water, or wooden cloves, or palm leaves, shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the bandage placed on the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the others; and it should also be long enough for the limb's size or length. Then press on the bandages as you did with the first layer, then tie them using a medium-sized linen thread, not too thick nor too thin, like this: pull it tight first over the fracture; then tie it evenly, without leaving less than two finger widths between each bandage.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	"And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the splints after the bandaging on healthy areas, place linen bandages or wool wadding underneath them so that it does not bruise."
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	"When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the skin is broken, I will speak about its treatment later on."
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	"And know that one should not bind all broken limbs with splints on the first day."
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	When the limb is large, it is not necessary to apply hot plasters immediately; after 5 or 7 days, according to your assessment of whether the inflammation is heating up. Here is the manner of the ancient emplastes for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with many eggs. Apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common method of the restorative emplaster for fractures in various positions, especially for women and small children, as it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	"Another method for making a poultice that restores fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take of bdellium and ladanum and wild marjoram and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, each 10 drams; aloes wood, 5 drams; aloeroot, 7 drams; grind them into a powder and mix it with many eggs. If the person's complexion is hot, use this poultice, for it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and it is beneficial to many people."
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of emplaster for twist: Take myrrh and nard, each 10 drachms; frankincense and aloe, each 9 drachms; acacia 6 drachms; bolic armenic 10 drachms. Grind well and mix with water or many eggs. Apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other manner to plaster joints and bones out of their places, and alleviate the pain occurring, and grind the bone, and break it: Take new linen, and moisten it in hot water and cooked oil, and place on the spot.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for alleviating heat from an abscess, and removes pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	"Another method for making a poultice that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and dock leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice."
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner to plaster for the healing of bone fracture and to soften the remainder of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of mullein, camomile flowers, violet petals, wheat flour – each one part; grind them and mix with wine. If the limb is hot, mix it with coriander water or water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another manner to plaster stronger than the first one, when a hard abscess forms on the healing member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of mullein, linseed, balm, melilot, senna, violet flowers and camomile flowers – each one part; grind them and mix with salt water, sweet water, or wine according to the warmth of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	"Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more. He says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard."
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	"And it seems to Galen that one should put dry and slightly warm things on a broken limb to restore it, such as myrrh, aloe, frankincense, and similar substances, as we have said."
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	"Another method for making a poultice that is beneficial for wounds and pain: Take myrrh and the cut hair of men or feathers of birds, and violet leaves, each an equal part; grind them together and make a poultice with it."
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then wait a little while afterwards, and take care if the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; thus do not let it heal for many days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry, and remove the bandage immediately, and lift away the plaster gently; and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip in water, and apply it to the place until the itching stops, and the pain is eased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry wool, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it with a bandage, until you are sure of a warm inflammation; and let the swelling of the limb subside, and the pain be removed, then begin again the gentle binding, and a little plaster, but do not bind too tightly as before; and continue gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen are all gone, and you need plaster and bandages again, then resume it, just as you did at first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If no improvement is seen in the limb from what we have said, it should not be dislocated until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; sometimes it can be left for up to 20 days, depending on what one sees, until the fracture is evident and the flesh approaches its proper alignment. Then it will hold more securely, and the bone will grow its flesh, as I said before. And if you see that the place dries out too much, know that nourishment cannot come there; then apply hot water compresses every time you dislocate it, doing this every third day, and slacken the bandage a little. By this method, nourishment will reach the limb quickly, and thus it will improve what foolish doctors do who reset the limb crookedly: that is wicked, and such actions are cowardly, and I see nothing else but leaving it and doing it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various types of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of fractures exist, and diverse figures, and the causes are distinguished: for there are fractures that are caused by blows from a sword, and the collarbone breaks all the bone down to the hip joint which is beneath the bone, just like breaking wood; and therefore this kind of fracture is called 'haichure'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures is large or small
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is percussion that embeds, splits, or crushes from a fall onto stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture that approaches the bone tissue beneath the bone or is above it, and this wound can be large or small
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that enters the bone as thin as a hair, and the crack is small, and therefore this fracture is called 'capillaire'; And if the wound is made either by striking with stone or by falling or by similar thing, and causes the piece of bone to enter inwards, and the place is raised like when goldsmiths strike on gold cups; then it enters between the stones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their heads, like the head of a child; And all these kinds of fractures have small pieces that are dislodged like stars; And I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all types of fractures by the displacement on them, by careful inspection, and by the corrupted flesh that is above them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary fracture is recognized because when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on, the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating a fracture, pay attention to any accidents of illness, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, extension, pallor, fever with chills, inflammation of the eyes, etc., in many conditions, he cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming accident and hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounded person first comes to you, especially in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone does not become corrupted and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	If bone fragments reach the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the broken part thusly. And it is necessary that you take hold of the patient's head, and uncover the bone in all ways possible, with great care over the shape of the wound. If blood flows or a large abscess forms during uncovering of the bone, help him as needed, and then fill the space with bandages moistened in rose oil. Let the wound rest until the large abscess subsides, and ensure there is no bleeding. Then begin removing the bone around it, which can be done in two ways.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	"And then I add another cut, greater than the first one."
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	"The second method is that you have many different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron. And work lightly so that you do not injure the head."
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	"And if the bone is prominent and hard, then you must pierce around it before you administer cuts with trepanation, not so deep that they penetrate the soft bone, and each one should have a margin or circle on top to prevent the point from passing through the bone; and you should have several of these, so that each one fits in its place on the blade of the bone, so that you have trepanations for all testicles. And this is the form of the three kinds of trepanation:"
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	"The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place one trepanation on the bone and turn it with your hands until you feel that the bone has been pierced; then remove the trepanation a little further away, and do this all around, then cut with scissors the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this as subtly and lightly as possible, so that you can remove the bone by hand or with any of the tools you have such as tweezers; and make sure that you do not touch the cerebellum or the medulla oblongata."
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And once you have pierced and trimmed the bone, it is necessary that you reset the remaining sharp edge of the bone with another tool resembling an incision blade, but this one must be thinner and more delicate than the others. If any small bones or fragments remain, remove them gently using the tools; then dress the wound with bandages and ointments as previously mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	"And the other way of operating is that which Galen recommends, which is safer; and he praises it very much, these are his words:"
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	"It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone where the fracture appears more openly, so that when you have exposed this part, then place beneath the head of this lenticular knife, of which here is the form:"
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut too deeply on one side, for the flesh is thin on both sides so that the blade faces the bone; then strike lightly with a small hammer around the bone, but beware of the membrane underneath; if it adheres to the bone, remove it gently without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	"And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the dura mater, and the bone is only cut on top with small pieces, then it is necessary to remove this prominence and remove the scales with a fine razor that you should have in various quantities, so as to accommodate each place according to the operation and shape of the fracture."
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	"So remove first with large razors, and then with more delicate ones, and do not stop doing this until it is completely done."
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	"In each of the other capillary cuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary to adapt your action according to its direction; this is something that cannot be responded to by anyone who has dedicated their study to this art."
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is open, you must take one linen cloth according to its size, moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled over two or three times, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. Do this gently so as not to burden the wound, then apply a bandage above and do not tie too tightly, only enough to touch the wound itself. Leave it thus for one or two days until the inflammation has subsided, then remove it and apply medicines such as lily roots, vesce powder, frankincense powder, aloe, etc. Make these into powders and apply them to the wound, also administering mundification medicines without biting. Ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave oil or allow bowels to gather on it, for when bowels accumulate on the brain cloth, they corrupt and cause great harm to the patient.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	"Therefore be careful, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt."
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a blackness appears on the surface due to the medicine applied that has such virtue, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix it with one cloth, and put it on the surface; then treat as usual until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	"Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or only one is broken by itself, for these are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is struck or twisted, then it heals."
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must press your little finger or a needle into the nostril, and place the break evenly on your index finger and hold it there gently until the nostril regains its natural shape; and do this lightly, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	"And if the break is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you must insert a small rod with a rounded end into it."
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, then do likewise, and hasten to reset it on the first day if you can; but if not, after the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided, then insert into the nose a wick made from linen cloths if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	"Or insert another one on the other side if there is a break there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill up the nostrils."
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers said that one must grease the tents with butter, changing each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary to grease them with a mixture of egg yolk and flour powder; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	"And sometimes feathers from a goose are inserted instead of bandages into the nostrils, with one soft cloth wrapped around them, and if the break is held in place, then let the patient blow gently through them; do what you see fit."
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	"And if inflammation appears in the nose while you are working on it, then insert there wax or cotton soaked in rose oil or a little bit of diacynthion."
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess does not form, apply a plaster with flour of sesame and powdered incense mixed with egg yolk. Then place light bandages on it without binding the nose. And if the break is small but fragmented into many pieces, extract them using appropriate instruments, then sew up the fissure and treat the surrounding flesh with appropriate ointments and plasters. If there are no internal wounds in the nose, cure the tents by inserting splints of lead until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	On the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured below and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only on one side, not completely broken into two pieces, it can be easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side, place your left index finger in the patient's mouth and feel for it; if it is on the left jawbone, place your right index finger inside your mouth and gently press on the fracture from outside with your other hand until it aligns.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced by two fingers' width, you must apply traction forcefully until it is aligned.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is displacement or fracture of teeth, thread them with gold, silver or silk thread. Then apply cerote on the broken jawbone and place a double cloth over it. Next, put on a well-made bandage or a piece of leather cut to size according to the length and width of the jawbone, and tie it securely behind the head. Tell the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the position changes, untie it on the third day and then reapply what was loosened. Then apply a plaster made from flour mixed with albumen or sesame flour, after removing the cerote. Next, place a light linen over the plaster. If the plaster dries and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it heals; many times it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if swelling appears, apply what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been lost. If so, use appropriate instruments to remove it carefully.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, widen it with a cautery according to your needs.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these fragments, and none remain, then sew the wound if it is wide, and place one of the bandages suitable for this, to encourage flesh growth until it heals.
de la forcele	From the scalpel
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The scalpel has broken several times near the shoulder blade, and there are three types of breaks: either it is broken off in two places without any fragments, which is easiest to reset; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	The operation is as follows when there is no wound: you will need two assistants so that one can hold the scalpel which has been broken while the other extends the neck towards the part; then align the break between your hands so that the shape is correct and there is neither appearance nor displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round cloth or linen sponge under the patient's shoulder according to your needs; then lift the scalpel and grasp the sponge with your hand so that you can align the break correctly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the blade of the scalpel forward because it has gone in deep, then have the patient lie on their side with a pillow under their shoulder and place a small cushion underneath. Then have your assistant press down on the shoulder so that the bone of the blade is lifted up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then align the break with your hands and if it is displaced, you must cut upwards. Gently remove any fragments and if the bone cannot be realigned due to any obstruction, use one of the cutting instruments you have to remove the obstacle underneath the scalpel while protecting the tissues.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it resembles a spoon, and is not raised, and let it be as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and let it have two heads, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, like the pathway of the wound that you made when you handled the bones; and when you are assured of hot abscess, so cut the wound, and if the pathway is small, or you doubt hot abscess, then cover the wound with rags and cloths, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if granulation tissue is not present, soak a piece of gauze in rose oil mixed with honey and vinegar, and apply it to the wound.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The strapping of the bone, when it is without wounds and incisions, is that you place on the bone the plaster of mill dust and egg yolk, and put light dressings on top, and put a splint under the armpit if necessary; then take a very large bandage a palm wide, then put a double cloth on the dressings and the plaster; then take a fine strip three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and put the strip on the fracture, and wind the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the injured armpit; and tighten each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture well, and you see clearly that the strip does not move over the broken bone, then rewarm it every day, and when the swelling decreases, then loosen it; and make the patient lie on their back, and put a small pillow under the armpit to lift the shoulder up; thus lighten the fracture of its weight by the lightening of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless some misfortune occurs, for up to twenty days; then recommence the plastering if it seems necessary, and tighten and leave it like that until it is restored; and it is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and in fewer for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Treatment of shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	**When the shoulder bone is broken or dislocated and not back in its place, you can only feel it by touching; so arrange it according to the shape of the break, and set it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can. Then put flour mixed with an egg on the place, and light bandages, and cover it with a double cloth. Then put a wide and thin plaster, a bit wider than the shoulder; and if there are any hairs under the plaster in some part of the shoulder, fill those hairs with linen bandages so that the plaster lies evenly; and then bind it all firmly with one great bandage, so that the plaster does not move from its place. Check the dressing every day; and whenever it loosens, tighten it, and put the plaster back in its place if it has moved, and let the patient lie on his side. And the shoulder is healed in twenty days or in twenty-five. And when this number is completed, then untie it, and be sure, for it's not bone that goes out easily.**
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a fragment of bone sticks out and is not beneath the heart, cut it off and apply the treatment for fracture of the collarbone as mentioned earlier to encourage granulation tissue formation.
de la brisure dou pis	Treatment of elbow fracture
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the ankle.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	When it is broken in the middle, it tilts downward, and the patient feels great pain and faintness, and quickly, and sometimes vomits blood, and the marrow appears through the broken bone.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies often on their back, and places one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with their hands, and carefully puts them even in all ways they can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then places emplasters and compresses above the subtle point of salt or other light wood, and wraps it in one cloth, and ties it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turns the tie around to the back and tightens it evenly, and re-winds the bandage every hour, and if it loosens, tightens it; and if it is necessary to untie it, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and untie it, and remove the emplaster, and addresses what has come there in ways of cures; then resets the emplaster, and tightens it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	de la brisure des costes
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of the ribs happens only in large places after the back, and at the head inside, and they bend only because they are glarious; and one feels it well by examining the two sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you align the break evenly as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a splint, and bind it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of the ribs is leaning inward, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lung; and they have difficulty breathing, and cough up a lot of blood, and it is a serious condition, and the ancients used to put great effort into treating it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are some who say that one should give him foods that swell the belly, to push back the break from within.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, lest abscesses come if they were not there before.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they are there, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	"And they said that one should place cupping glasses on the spot to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt whether the cupping glasses will draw out the excesses to the location due to the condition of weakness."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	"And they said that one should cover the spot with moistened wool in hot oil, and then place tents between the ribs to make the belt equal, after which it should be treated with pleurisy treatment, flesh, and medicine."
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone pressing on the flesh, and there is doubt about the patient's condition, then it is necessary to cut above the location of the broken bone, and place an instrument beneath to protect the skin; then one should trim the bone and gently pull it out, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and apply splints until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess begins to form, then place moist cloths soaked in rose oil on it and apply them to the spot; treat the area regularly as necessary for an abscess, and let him lie constantly on that side until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	"de la brisure dou col"
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	"No fracture ever comes to the bones of the neck, and hardly does it bend; and likewise to the spine of the back."
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his hands are softened and swollen and numb, and he cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that many are mortal in several conditions, and if he moves them and feels it well when they are pressed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if properly treated.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar condition comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his feet are softened, and if the accident has happened in his hands, and windy emission and excretion occur without control; and when he is continually laid on his belly, excretion occurs without control.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he lies on his back and wants to saddle himself up, he cannot do so.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: therefore, do not labor over its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	"And if this accident does not happen to them, then the matter is lighter."
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	"And the treatment is that you should watch if there is hot inflammation, then put rose oil or goose grease on the spine until it is appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, bind it with a bandage, and tell the patient to rest; and they should not sleep on the part where they feel pain until they are healed."
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	"And if any bone dislocates, one must compress on the chest; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound if it is large with one stitch, then treat it with ointment that penetrates the flesh until it heals; and if the socket of the bone is broken, which is called the 'socket of the cow,' put your left hand's pouch into it and place it level with the other hand with all your strength, then put on a plaster and a splint if necessary; then compress it, and if there is dislocated bone, open it up and remove it, and treat the wound until it heals."
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Here is the translation for "de la brisure de l’os de la hainche":
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If it happens that the bone of the temple is broken, and if this happens, there occurs a slight diminution to the head; and it makes one lean forward, and declines towards the parted side, and pain comes to the patient at the place where it is broken, and pricking, and swelling at what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you raise your hand up until you are above the break; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the head only, then set this break so that it is in its natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or declines inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that the restoration of this break can be seen more easily.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it in its proper place, then put on the splint, then put a wooden or metal splint over it, and bind the break so that it does not move; and fill in the space under the ribs until the bandage is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on their sound side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if any inflammation comes, do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and bind it as it should be, if there is no bad complication; and that is the manner of treatment.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Regarding the break of the shoulder blade
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder blade is that which is between the ribs and the head of the shoulder bone. And if it is broken, it should be restored in one of these two ways:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie two joints together with two strings and hang them from above, and have the patient sit on one seat; then throw his broken arm onto the wood until it reaches the elbow, and place it in a curve of wood, then hang some heavy object or have the assistant pull it down; then put the break in line with your hands together so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is to place the patient on their backrest and have them put their hand on their neck, then command two assistants to each take one end of the break with their hands—the first one taking the top part and the second one taking the bottom—and extend each one towards its side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then hold down the lien below the break and above it, extending each of the assistants to their respective sides.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you must put one lien in the middle under the saddle and the other towards the hip, under the break; and likewise if the break is towards the hip, it is necessary to place a lien gently, without labor, so that the break is even on its place and on the hip; then set the break evenly as it should be, and hold it steady so that no abscess forms.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if there are gaps present, then do not tie it too tightly for at least 28 days, and put wet linen on it and rose oil until the inflammation is calmed; then tie it tight, and the method to tie it is as follows: place the splint on the break, then bring the arm close to the support and put your hand on the shoulder or chest; then put the bandage on and tie it tightly onto the support and arm so that the arm is in line with the stars, unless something prevents it or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving back into place, then use stars (splints) and put one larger and stronger than the others on top of the break with two fingers' width between each splint. Each splint should be large enough to extend three fingers past the break on either side; then tie them on as I described at the beginning of this chapter for the break, tying more tightly and without stretching too much.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the settling of the bones and the swelling as we have described, when you reset the broken limb, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave it tied for seven days as we have said; then examine each day every three days to ensure that no itching or inflammation comes to the place where the dressing cannot reach the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, then do not untie it until after three days or more, and have the patient lie on his back, with his hands on his stomach. Put one cushion full of wool under the shoulder blade, ensuring it is evenly distributed, and watch every hour day and night to make sure the broken limb does not move or the ligaments soften. Then apply the address through the power of medicine, and give him the food we have mentioned before, making sure the food is initially subtle; when he begins to recover, then let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset forty days after the injury, at which point one must untie it and administer baths and ointment medicines to set them straight.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the restriction is ugly and swollen, then delay untying it for forty days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones called the two "fossicles", one of which is small and supports the wrist; the other is large and is located beneath it towards the little finger. Sometimes only the large fossicle breaks, or sometimes only the small one does, but both may also break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, restoration is easy, and healing is quick; but when large ones are broken, healing is difficult, and causes more pain than when they break together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, it should be gently stretched out and made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone that is broken, it should be pulled harder; and stretched out on the cushion, with the pouch of the hand held higher than the others, and the small toe lower than the others, and the patient should cross their legs over themselves, with the cushion placed before them higher up so that the patient suffers no labor; then extend the minister's strong arm to the part below his hand or elbow, and another minister on the other side above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then the physician should place it even according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are broken fragments in the fracture, then each should be placed back in its proper position; and if any fragment is too short to grasp with forceps, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut off and remove the bone, as we have mentioned before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is also a wound from the breakage, I have spoken about it in the chapter on wounds specifically; so take care of it accordingly.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if hot abscesses occur at the start of restoration, then apply a cloth made from rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft, and tie it gently on top until the hot abscess is appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the wax, and place the emplastre of powdered millstone with abundance of egg; then add the tiles, ensuring that the breaking tile is always stronger and a little wider than the others. Know that it should have six tiles on each arm in various arrangements: whether the breaker is in one of the bones or two; and tightened more above the breaker than elsewhere, and always less when moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are on the breaker be soft and moist, and not hard nor harsh; and let the threads with which it is bound be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the lien after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should wash the limb with warm water until those itches are soothed; and let the limb rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then restart the bandaging, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	"And if it is observed that the bandaging cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little and leave it thus for several days until the inflammation arrives, and then apply restraint."
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, then do not untie him for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or if he around him, then let him place his hands on his neck, and keep his neck even, and guard against movement and shaking, and sleep on his back; and know that this dislocation is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and temperaments of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and around both wrists, there are few fractures; it is mostly dislocation that occurs.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	"And when the palm of the hand is fractured or dislocated, then the patient must sit cross-legged and sit upright in front of them correctly. Then they place their hand on an extended table, and the physician extends the broken bones and aligns them so that they are well joined; and applies plasters and bandages if no infection occurs, then places a splint according to the quantity of the area affected; and is wrapped in one linen cloth."
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	"And if the fracture is at the edge around the belly of the palm, then make a splint of bandages and instruct the patient to tie it to their broken palm. Then bind it with a long bandage, and let the splint be made of soft cloth, as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it accordingly."
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	"And if the fracture is on the back of the hand, then you must place a splint above it and another below in the palm so that the hand is open and straight. Then bind it all around the hand, and make sure the binding between both wrists is secure."
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	"And if the fracture occurs on any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, then align it correctly and bind it with the palm. If you see fit, place a small straight splint to raise the fracture and keep it from moving. And if the fracture is on one of the other fingers, such as the index finger or another, align it and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or bind them all together in one bandage, whichever is more useful; or place a splint on it like the thumb. Be wary of inflammation during restoration and take care to treat any heat that may occur, as I have said."
de la cuixe brisie	Regarding the fractured hip:
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The hip bone is often broken, which can be seen when it rotates forwards and backwards; and the restoration of this involves tying one bandage above the break and another below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	Then the patient lies on their face, then each of the ministers extends their bandage to their side evenly; and this is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the dislocation is near the root of the thigh, then let one ligament be toward the knife handle, and the other ligament beneath the dislocation.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And likewise if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be near the knee, and let the extension be below; then the physician places the bone even with both hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then puts on the splint, and the bandage, so that no abscess appears.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot swelling, let it cool down first before returning to your task and care; the bandage should be done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the break a hard doubled bandage of two or three, and hold back the excesses, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee below, and bring the ends of the thread upwards; then wrap the bandage around the leg and hip, then place splints on the break, and place one splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and hip with soft cloths to ensure even pressure, then begin to tie firmly three or four times around the break; and as you go higher up the break, tie less tightly; then take the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the leg and hip, and tie three splints that are above, then return below to the end of the thread, until you reach near the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens that it becomes loose, untie it and address whatever has come undone, as we have said many times before. And if there are any pieces of bone sticking out, remove them if possible; otherwise, split the space and draw them out. Then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thighbone breaks in such a way that splints are placed on it, as in the case of the elbow and arm. Nevertheless, with this type of restoration, the patient does not limp.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thighbone is restored in about one month or a little less or a little more, depending on the differences in complexion.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know this: In the cruciate ligament of the knee there is little breakage, but it tears often.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is merely a crack or hole, and this happens with every wound, even without one. Everyone feels this.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is done by putting back in place what was around it until it fits as well as possible. Then put on the splint and add a round splint if necessary, tying it tightly enough. Then follow all the precautions that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as heat and inflammation; then apply whatever is appropriate for each case until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know this: The leg has two bones called by rights the "mustelz" and the "foscile", and its fracture is like that of the arm in every respect, with equal restoration. And if both bones are broken together, it twists the leg in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fibula is broken, the foot turns inward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, great pain is felt and it is clearly visible; it turns towards the bottom.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, apply traction and set it evenly, then tie the splints evenly. But if the break is ugly with many pieces, make the traction lighter and gentler; adjust according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, then take two strips of bark from the ash tree that will wrap around the leg on both sides and be as long as the leg from below the knee downwards; then wrap it in two layers with a bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left at this point, and thus it is good. And some also use one splint of wood the length of the leg and place the leg on it to prevent movement, and this is done properly where there is a wound; and each day move the leg to see if there is any heat or other accident; and treat it until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle does not suffer fractures, but sometimes bones in the foot are broken and so are the toes; and there are many ways of treating these injuries.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bones in the foot, and you see these bones sticking up above each other, then place your bad foot on the ground, as if it wanted to go forward, and then put your good foot on top of the broken bones, where they are raised up; then press down until they return to their proper places. Then apply splints and dressings, and place a small table with two hollowed-out legs under the instep of the foot; then strap it firmly around the foot, then wrap it in cloths and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the toes are broken, then set them back in place as we have said for the fingers of the hand. Then put a splint on the broken toe according to its length and make it a little wider; then place the table that I mentioned under the foot and strap it firmly around it. And if there are two or three or more toes broken, then put a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and strap the table under the foot; and let them be placed at the top of the table so that they touch the underside of the foot well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have mentioned for other fractures, and treat each injury according to how it ought to be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the thumb bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, make her sit wide-legged, then lean her toward the back part, and have her held from behind. Then fill the cavity of the woman's nature with cotton, packing it in as thick as one's fist. Then lift the woman gently, little by little, causing the cotton to move until it reaches the entrance of the nature, and the bone will return with the fist. And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has done so, put it back again, continuing this process for about seven days: thus the break will be restored. If you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie a tube to its opening, insert the entire bladder into the nature, then blow into the tube forcefully until the bladder is inflated inside. Then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for several days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the little finger of man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said regarding the thighbone; and these breakages are not hidden from those who apply their study and practice, and listen to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	But breaking means in many cases the direct way of restoration. So follow it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the penis is broken, take a goose's neck and put it on the penis; then wrap cloths around it and leave it for three or four days, and it will soon be healed.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for anyone who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or the arm or similar, to be healed now, according to the treatments that we have mentioned.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then rinse it with vinegar or nitre, and begin to restore the fracture at that same hour or day, provided that no fever ensues.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if a fever ensues, then delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the inflammation is calmed, and do not attempt to touch it on the third or fourth day, lest you cause further harm.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is exposed above the heart, then it is necessary for you to put it back in place quickly with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not suitable for putting it back in place with your hands, then use this iron instrument, which has seven or eight fingers of length and its width according to the size of the wound. And it is necessary for the doctor to shape three or four of them according to what is needed in each case of fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your procedure. And have it pointed at the front and thicker at the middle towards the front like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called 'palainche', therefore the curved head must be placed on the visible bone end, pushing once until it returns and becomes even.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is small and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone until the instrument can hold it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot put the bone back in place as we have said, then cut off the excess with an instrument suitable for this purpose, such as a chisel or a knife. Then smooth off the rough edges and small fragments that remain on the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	So make sure it is in its natural position, then moisten a cloth in black setifical wine and cleanly apply it if it's summer; do not put cerate or any other oiled substance on the wound to prevent decay and corruption. Then apply bandages after resetting the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the surrounding skin according to the size of the wound. Be careful that the wound is not restricted with the fracture, as many foolish physicians have done, leading to death or corruption for the patient. Let the bandage be softer and gentler than usual for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that some misfortune may come of it, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then do not put on bandages; but wrap around, instead of bandages, hard cloths, and secure them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when after one or two days you see that the wound has begun to close, then remove what you have placed on it from all sides, and put on healing salve, such as tetrafarmacon salve and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	"And it is necessary that you wash the member twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is clean and healthy."
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	"And the limb must be positioned in such a way that the bowel moves down easily."
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	"And if many days pass and it does not heal but the bowel returns again, know that there are small bone fragments, so you must clean the wound with a cloth and remove all these unwanted pieces that cause this pain."
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula appears at the site, or some other kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in the chapter before this one.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the thighbone or shoulderbone and other similar large bones, do not pull it out, for many people die from this, but let it rot until after 20 or 30 days perhaps it will fall off by itself; then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	"of the bruises that come on the sore"
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	"We often see afterwards the condition of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and the sight of the limb's figure is unpleasant; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions."
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	"Therefore, beware if the bone is fresh: if the physician applies medicines that are astringent, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you take any of these things or all together and mix them with tincture of wine or with egg yolk or with garlic; and put them on the bone in poultices, and bind it well and do not remove it for several days; and then remove it, and begin again another one until the swelling is gone; or you can bind a well-made piece of lead onto it; because the property of lead is that it removes all swellings from the limbs. And if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut off the excess above and make the apparent superf
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	"of the limb which becomes weak after the treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	"If the fracture of the bone is healed and afterwards the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings and nourishment could not reach the limb; or because of too much exercise; or because of too sudden movements, not at the right time; or because there was little blood in his body, so he is weak."
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	"And the cure is to make the sick person eat and make his body supple until blood is multiplied in him; and apply baths, and give him joy and pleasure; then put pitch on the limb so that the pitch attracts great nourishment, and often rub it with warm water until nourishment reaches the limb; and finally return it to its natural figure."
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	"of the limb twisted after the healing"
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after being restored, and the broken bone becomes visible, and the form of the limb is unsightly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: thus do not believe the foolish who say one must break the limb again anew, many a foolish physician has done this in our land; and these works are blameworthy, and great evils come of them, sometimes even death. Nonetheless, if the joints and ligaments are fresh, they should be rinsed with hot water, or softening herbs should be cooked, such as willow leaves, roots, and melilot, and similar things; and make one soft plaster, such as diacylon well made, and take the mucilage of willow, and cook it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply the plaster on. Or take ripe figs, crush them with fennel seed, and similar medicines that soften the adhesion.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes dislocation occurs due to prolonged and continuous rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And arrange for gentle movement of the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is inveterate and hardened like stone, and it needs to be cut away with iron, then it must be cut down to the bone with a fine, light scalpel; and put care and skill into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur when a joint is displaced from its proper place, so that it cannot move, and the limb is misshapen, and the sufferer feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, it must now be reset without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the place swells up, and sometimes it is scarcely reset to its proper place; therefore, do not move the limb when it is swollen: many times this brings on spasms and other pains. Nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient be bled until the inflammation is appeased; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and cure each limb as it comes into its proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have arranged chapters on dislocations from head to toe.
des mandibules	Of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws are dislocated and they become slightly displaced from their position, which makes them softened a little; sometimes both of them are completely dislocated and hang down towards the chest, causing saliva to drip out of the mouth so that it cannot be held in, nor can the mouth be closed, and speech becomes tangled with the tongue.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is small, it returns by itself with more dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and whole, you must quickly reset it without delay. And do this in such a way that the assistants hold the patient's head, and the surgeon places one hand with a pouch on the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and let the other two hands remain free to provide balance; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the master will put it back in place until it returns to its proper position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the jawbone is dislocated, even if both jaws are dislocated together, then apply hot water and oil so that they can move more easily; do not force them back into place, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are realigned evenly, and the patient closes his mouth without softening, then place moistened cloths made from rose oil and wax onto it, then bind it lightly with soft bindings; and have the patient sleep on their back, with both shoulders between two pillows so that they do not move either to the right or left, nor try to chew, but take only light food until the pains are gone, and the jaws are healed. Then they may eat what they wish easily, without trying to open their mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is completely healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if both jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not returned to their proper position, then fever and chills will ensue, and sometimes diarrhea, and sometimes vomiting of bile alone.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see these symptoms, then know that it is a loss [of life]; and many times the person to whom this happens dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	Jaw dislocations are treated using forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The jaw cannot be dislocated on the side towards its continuity with the ear, and sometimes it is dislocated backwards, which can be felt distinctly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on their back, extending their arms; then press firmly with your palm against the place, and it will return; then place the emplaster and bandage, binding it tightly; and the shoulder toward the side cannot dislocate again; if it does dislocate once, reset it to its place as we have said; then place the emplaster and bandage, binding it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed. The same applies for resetting the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder dislocates only in three ways: one is that it dislocates at the part of the socket below; and the second is at the part of the breastbone; and rarely does it dislocate above, which happens little; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder blade, nor does it dislocate inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates below towards the socket, especially those who are fat, as it pops in quickly; those who have enough flesh, it pops only slightly and returns slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes in certain men there is injury or fracture, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with heat and swelling, and they believe that it has been dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you should examine it until you are certain; then begin the treatment
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that dislocations occur when they are downwards towards the socket, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, which you will find manifest in their diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the socket touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their neck nor move with any movement; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not concealed, for you can feel it manifestly; and this manner of dislocation is difficult to reset when it is recent, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is for the surgeon to lift the hand of the patient upwards, then place their fingers beneath the armpit and forcefully raise the joint upwards in its place, and the surgeon lifts the hand up and places it underneath it will quickly come back into place
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	If dislocation does not occur as we have described most days afterward, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and let them be given a moisturizing and soothing plaster, such as a decoction of mallow, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and let it be applied. Then have the patient lie on their back, and place under their shoulder blade an even pillow, not too soft nor too hard. Then the doctor places their heel on the pillow, gently lifts the head of the affected shoulder, and pulls the patient's hand. And another servant holds the patient's head so that it does not move down. If the shoulder comes back into place correctly, then reset it in this manner: Have present a man who is larger than the patient; have him stand upright against the side, and place his shoulder under the patient's shoulder blade, and lift the shoulder blade upwards, so that the patient hangs from the arm; and another servant pulls the patient's hand down towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, hang something heavy on him, and the dislocation will return.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the reset is also done in another way: a long stick is placed upright in the ground, with its top level with the knee-cap and neither too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the patient, but softly wrapped in cloth, and the patient stands on one end of the wood; then stretch his hand downwards on the other side, and the joint will quickly return to its place. And if it still does not want to return despite all these things we have said, then perform this cure: take a stick two spans long and four fingers wide, with a round top for easy insertion deep under the buttock.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place on the head of the patient a cloth dampened with water so that the wood does not burn him; then put it under his armpit; and extend his arm over the log; and tie the shoulder to the log, and the arm at the hand's elbow joint, then put the arm over one step of a ladder wide enough, and let the hand hang downwards, and leave the body hanging on the other side: The dislocation will now be reduced.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, whatever way this may be, then you must put under the armpit a wad of wool equal in size; then place on the shoulder the emplastrum prepared with powder from the millstone, with incense and albumen of egg all around; then draw it under the armpit gradually, and turn the bandage over the emplastrum, and wrap the hand around its neck, and let it remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he consume little food until the member is strengthened, for it will heal more quickly; and then consume more afterwards after five or six days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is removed from its place due to moisture that has come there or for another reason, then you must administer cauteries with three holes, as it is shown before in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and afterwards after twenty days the joint is still dislocated, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder has been cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be reduced to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the breast and the paps, or behind, is made by impulse and extension of hands, and another bandage is administered to it; and care must be taken until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing pain comes to the member and slowness in movement, then the sick person should take many baths until that pain is alleviated and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated forwards and returns forwards; and if it is dislocated in all directions, especially forwards and backwards, and the dislocation has not been reduced, for one can see and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick limb with the healthy one, so you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder completely.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reduce it before swelling comes there, for if swelling comes there, then reduction will be difficult; and perhaps it cannot be reduced entirely, especially if it is behind; so this dislocation is worse than others, and is of greater pain, and sometimes death ensues.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the reduction is when it can be reduced in such a way that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread apart, and place the joints of your fingers according to the neck around, above, and below, and push the joint into his palm together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is forwards, then it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and pushes the neck that is dislocated from the root of the palm.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is necessary that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold it, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm on each side, then wrap a doubled cloth long and wide around it; and when the physician has joined the joint with his hand, then anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, then push the joint strongly until it returns; and when it is in place, put dry plaster with eggwhite, and bind it tightly, and tie the arm to the neck of the sick one, and leave it for several days, then untie it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, then untie the bandage and leave it alone; and if you see that the joint has not healed well, then recommence the compress and the bandage, and leave it on for several days until it is firmly set; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves again, then bathe and rub him gently, and press until it is relaxed; or put a poultice of greasy mutton fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, if you rub the joint temperately, then put the poultice back on, and then enter the bath again; and do this two or three times until he is healed; and if necessary, put damp hot fern ashes mixed with butter on it, and bind it.
li dislocation de la main	Dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is easy to reduce, easier than other joints. Nevertheless, it should be reduced as quickly as possible in the very hour that it occurs, before the place becomes swollen or a hot swelling comes there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is thus: You place the invalid hand on a table, and extend your own hand, and the physician places it evenly, so that he puts his palm on the surface of the joint, and presses until it returns completely to its proper position; you must then observe whether it is properly in place. Then the patient places the back of their hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient places the back of their hand on the table, and the physician places his hand on the surface of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good. But if not, then press with soothing plasters or hot compresses until it remains there without moving again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if the patient cannot bear it and you cannot place it back in its proper position after several days, then the joint remains twisted. And it does not harm anything except that the hand is weakened and cannot grasp anything: know then that the nerve or artery has been cut. There is no other remedy but to cauterize nearby with fire.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	"And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then remove it and leave it so."
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	"If he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then apply warm water poultice, and rub it until it becomes flexible."
de la dislocation des dois de la main	"On the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	The hand's fingers sometimes dislocate on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the front; then they are out of place and you push the dislocation towards your pouched area until it returns. Then support the head of the finger, tilt it towards the part where it was dislocated; leave it for two days, then align it on the third day; and tie it with a bandage as we have said, release it on the fourth day and make it move, then retie the bandage tightly. Do this repeatedly until it is firm. Do the same if it dislocates at the front of the hand, following what you've done here until it's healed.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	"On the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back"
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	"If the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are several dislocations, then there is no remedy, for death quickly ensues."
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign is that the evacuations happen without intent and cannot be held back, and many times certain limbs are weakened, such as both thighs or both arms, or sometimes the spine moves in three places; that which moves at the rear is called 'gilbositez': its treatment is to turn over if gilbositez has come from childhood: then there is no cure nor healing for all of it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ones spoke of methods of treatment with big words, but there is not always great benefit in all of them; but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have made tools in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes to the chest in front, there is no heat [fever]; and also that which comes directly to both sides, and one cannot cure it except for that which comes properly to the back, as I say; and it is necessary that the patient be laid on his face in one even place, and have a support underneath him so that he does not get injured. Then drive one stake at the head into the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie one rope around the thighs of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two assistants know how to hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two stakes. And let them be well fastened, the stake as we have said, and the physician put his palms firmly on the spine until it returns [to its normal position].
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, then take a board of three spans in length, and place it under the skin, and let the patient lie on their side, and insert the head of the board under the skin, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and let the physician put his feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see fit, do this on the turn that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you drive two stakes into the head of the patient's arm at one span apart, and two others towards the feet, with a handbreadth between each stake above and below; and let there be a hole in each stake where the joint turns, and let the stakes be firmly fixed in the ground so they do not move; and let there be one turning stake between each of the two main stakes, on which the joint turns, with two small stakes of a handbreadth long for turning the joint; and then tie the bandage that is among the assembly to the joint towards the head, and the other bandage towards the feet at the other joint, and each of the assistants turn their stake with all their might, and the master bring the spine into line as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is even [the dislocation], then place a drying plaster with abundant egg, and then the splints, and then the plate of three ounces in length, which should press on the location of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine; then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and let the patient use gentle nourishment until they are healed; and if any problem arises at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines along with the plate that we mentioned earlier; sometimes one also administers a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes out on the back spine, and one believes it to be dislocation; but this is the bone that appears, for which one should not presume: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	"Dislocations of the hip"
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder are dislocated only by dislocation, not as other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; but mostly inside others, and little dislocated front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the diseased knee appears more prominent than the healthy one; and the diseased person cannot bend their knee in the fire; and the place that is swollen with heat near an abscess is where the hipbone comes.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one whom it happens outside is that this accident is opposite to those in front
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of one whom it happens in front is that his leg seems well put together; nevertheless, he cannot bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot do so, and retains his urine, and the ankle swells up, and when he walks, he leans on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of one whom it happens behind is that he cannot straighten or bend his knee, and this leg is twisted compared to the other; the ankle is softened, and the bone of the thigh is located below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment for this type of dislocation is that you should check if the dislocation is old, and it remains in its position without any care; and there should not be any pride [in the affected person].
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you should hurry to put the joint back in place, both inside and outside, and move it to the right and left. Perhaps it will return [to its normal position], and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare the minister strongly, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or the lien where it is tied on the knee; and another minister stretches his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands underneath the patient's buttocks, then lifts him gently with a soft lien onto the hip; and another holds the head of the lien; and all extend upwards and downwards at once until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of stretching applies to four types of dislocation. If the dislocation has returned [to its normal position], as we have said, that is good
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this does not work, then you must apply treatment according to its likeness. When the dislocation is at the hip, you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the lien on the root of the hip and the place that is below the angle, then stretch the lien upwards towards the angle, and towards the thigh; then another minister takes the patient's arms, embraces the large bone of the sick hip, and stretches it out strongly: now it will return to its place. This method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	**And if thou canst not fasten it in this manner that we have said, then thou must bind the two feet of the patient together with a soft strong bandage on the two heels, and on the two knees, and let the limb of the sick be stretched out two spans longer than the other; then hang it on the head of a stake, and let there be two long arms above the ground; then command one minister to embrace the hip, and let another minister hang with the sick who embraces forcibly the hip, for now the joint returns hastily.**
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	**And when the dislocation is at the back, then let the sick lie as we have said in that who has gibbosity; and remove one bandage from the sick limb properly, and also from the foot; then put two stakes, one at the head and another at the feet, then stick one stake between the thighs of the sick in this manner; and have moist cloths around it so that it does not burn the sick, then let each minister extend towards him, and the doctor put his hand equally on the dislocation.**
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, then place upon [a] table, and press as we have said in the case of kyphosis; let the patient lie on their sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	"And when the dislocation is anterior, then extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said, and let the doctor place his pain on being above the affected ankle joint, then press with his other hand below towards the knee."
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, do not extend the patient downwards nor raise them up from the ground, but let them lie as if the hip was dislocated at the back, as we have said concerning childbirth upon the two hips; and let them lie on their face, with the leg extended as we have said before, and press upon the joint at the table; and it will be set when the patient extends their legs, and they are even; then join the thighs, place the splint, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let them rest for three or four days, then untie it and replace the splint; and if you see that they are even, then bind again as before, and leave it for three days; then untie it and let it go gently until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Chapter on dislocation of the knee joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	"The kneecap can dislocate in three ways: inward and outward, and backward; it does not dislocate forward."
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	**And the sign of this is that you command the patient to bend their leg towards their hip, and if it does not touch their hip, know that they are dislocated; and the treatment for all of these is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg as far as they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet; then take their knee in your palms, and pull it between your thighs, then bend both sides of the knee strongly; and another assistant extends their foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that they easily touch their leg to their hip lightly; and apply the plaster on top, and keep the leg pressed against the hip, tied together tightly for three or four days, then untie it; and do not let the patient walk until the limb is strengthened.**
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	**And if the limb is not completely healed, then administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of dislocation of the hip, until it is fully set.**
de la dislocation dou talon	Chapter on dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	"The heel can sometimes be wry and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward."
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and it tents forward at the part where it is dislocated; the resetting should be easy, and one must gently extend the limb with their hands when it is only slightly moved.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated entirely, one must make the patient sit up straight, and have assistants hold them firmly by the leg above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then your left hand twice, then lift it upwards, and place the foot firmly in its proper position; repeat this two times as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns to place, that is good. If not, begin the procedure again, for it will return. And if it cannot be returned thus, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly plant a stake in the earth between their thighs, and tie cloths around so as not to injure the patient; then have assistants hold the thigh, and another assistant extend the foot with their hands or use a rope tied to the neck of the foot; then each assistant should pull evenly, and the stake should always be between the patient's thighs to keep them steady while they are stretched; then the surgeon should place his hands evenly on the dislocation, and an assistant hold the healthy leg below it, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is ready, then place the plaster and bandages on it, bind it tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle so that the binding is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, bind it again; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if they walk before this time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"If inflammation occurs around the dislocation, you must calm it as we have described elsewhere until it is healed."
des dois	Chapter on dislocations of the fingers
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	"When the fingers are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, which is easy to do."
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the back of the foot, then you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table, completely upright, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press down on your foot with great force until it returns; and when it is even and nothing opens anymore, then place two-legged stool under the sole of the foot, then bind it tightly and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let them rest until they are healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Chapter on wounds accompanied by dislocations
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and one wishes to reset it, often the patient dies: therefore, do not be presumptuous in its treatment unless you are wise in the art and have practiced it extensively, and are compassionate and careful, not hasty; at first, apply soothing ointments for hot inflammation, and leave the patient in God's hands if there is no hope of recovery. But if there is hope, then reset the limb to its place before the inflammation becomes worse. Once the limb is in place, administer ointments to cool inflammation, and treat the wound as necessary with drying ointments. And if with dislocation there is fracture or crushed small bones, set them and do as we have said for simple fractures. Guard against fearing, as I have said, for this leads to sin according to your Creator, and harms your soul and body.
Amen	Amen
