O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, dearest son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine and its fulfillment. I have finished it with its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And there came to me in a vision that I should complete this book with the treatise on surgery, which is part of the work of hands.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	For the work of hands is greatly neglected in our region and has been destroyed everywhere, so that its knowledge has perished and diminished, and there remains nothing of it but small descriptions in books which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed and the knowledge is obscured.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Now it seems to me that I wish to revive this knowledge along with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation. And I will include alongside the forms of the instruments of cautery and other tools of the work with their declaration and preparation as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And whoever engages in this must climb into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the joints of limbs and their shapes and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, the number of openings, and the movement and rest of veins, and where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, but with a deed it is little; and this applies especially to the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before should guard against falling into error and killing people, as I have often seen many who engage in this science but abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who incised an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in her neck; so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And another surgeon who drew a stone from a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for to draw it out, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well whether cutting into him would cause his death.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And another surgeon took in charge the Duke of our land who had a broken leg with a wound; and the doctor, full of ignorance, held the break on top of the wound with strong bandages, and did not leave any linen on the wound, leaving it thus at the end; and commanded that he should not untie it; and so it remained until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot rotted.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to go untie his leg; and when I heard it crackled so, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all paths of corruption were already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed; and corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the whole member was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And another physician appeared who opened the enchanted abscess, and then inflamed it through the evil of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is purified of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all corrupted matter can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, surgery where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore you should be careful lest foolish physicians speak evil of you. Take up your implements with caution and undertake your patients lightly and steadfastly, using the best means so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; leave frightful diseases requiring difficult treatment; put aside your implements concerning things that cause doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the next in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his teachings: 'Do not take on the care of a serious illness unless you are called a foolish physician.'
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, arranged from head to foot; and about the forms of instruments, iron tools for cauterization, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, cupping glasses, wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; arranged with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; arranged from head to foot with the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we remember the work, I must describe the quality of the helper and the harm caused by each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of the helper and of harm are the longest speech and subtle science and secret responses. And about this most of the wise spoke, and they agreed on it. They allowed me few words because I feared lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally all temperaments where there is matter, except for two temperaments: namely, the hot temperament without matter and the dry temperament without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the temperament hot and dry together with matter, some said that cautery is great help there, but others said the opposite: that cautery is not useful for diseases coming from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat hot diseases with heat or dryness. And he who says the opposite argues that cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases found in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to these words.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this out sometimes by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And indeed, no one should meddle with this outside of those who have tried it and know by long practice the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and accidents and the changing seasons; we fear nothing else, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all physicians gathered together and agreed upon the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, my son, that the cautery with fire is one of the secrets of treatments, and has greater effectiveness than a cautery with hot medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not affect any other member but the one that is burned, and it does no harm if one can help it.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Hot medicines spread from member to member, causing severe inflammation and illnesses. Fire, due to its intensity and good nature, does not harm unless there is excessiveness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And what I have found by experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into this art, is true. And therefore I excuse myself for the length of my words, for it does not please me to deprive you of the secret that lies hidden in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it overcomes diseases of the body, as philosophers demonstrate; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when cauteries should be made, and chose priests.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm that occurs is alleviated by its help; especially if the cauteries are for necessary and urgent pains which cannot wait until a greater evil comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for a disease healed by cautery has no relapse; and they say this; but it is not so, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors that cause pain, and are worth more than medicines for their speed of action, virtue of their work and power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	It is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its strength; and are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little excess moisture, such as cauteries for toothache and similar things, and this kind of pain does not return.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are valuable after medicine, their intentions are mistaken, and cauteries are indeed the last resort of medicine because when we administer various treatments for any disease and they do not work, then we apply cauteries, and they are effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	So it is clear that cauteries are indeed the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries of gold are gentler than those of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its nobility; but they said that the place of cautery does not cause rottenness, but this is not true as I have experienced it, and I found that in some people it does cause rottenness; and cauteries of gold are gentler than those of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet, when you heat gold instruments, do not judge their heat by the color of the gold, for it quickly cools; and if they are heated too much, they become like fire; thus there is considerable hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use the fire cautery that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter from head to toe so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two kinds that are made due to a disease called 'soda,' and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears. It is also useful for a multitude of dreams, toothache, sore throat, and especially for all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine softening the head for three nights or four, according to what the virtue and age and habit of the patient can tolerate; and then perform the procedure behind the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit crossed-legged between your hands, and place his hands on some weight; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your middle fingers come together, there use the cautery called 'olivare', of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot, and move downwards and outwards with your hand little by little in a twisting motion; then raise your hand gently, and examine the spot if you see bone there; and if not, resume the cautery until you see bone as I told you; afterwards take a bit of wax, and put it inside soft cotton, and place it on the spot, leaving it for three days; afterwards place clean lint soaked in butter over it; leave it on until the burn is healed; then treat the wound with ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' until it is sound.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And as was said by the ancients, when a wound remains open for longer, it purges more; therefore, they recommended movement.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of these say that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it will be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should leave the cautery on until it penetrates as deeply into the bone as a skewer used by women for sewing, so that the humors may flow out more freely; and then one should let the wound remain open for a long time; afterwards, one should dress and bandage it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem good to me in every case, except perhaps for some people who have cause for fear; and it seems better to me that I should leave the head alone; because the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and likewise when the patient's head is naturally weak, the first method of cautery seems safer and milder to me, and this is the one I now use most often.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of ancient pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When pain comes to the whole head chronically and lasts for a long time, then the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie," and cleansing of the head with oils and plasters; and if the cautery we mentioned earlier is performed on them, it will not be beneficial.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be cautious if the patient's head is of strong nature and is not too cold; then cauterize it with a little bit less of the cautery we mentioned earlier.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, perform the cautery on the spot called "vassels"; and this is where cupping glasses are placed. Lightly touch your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and the cauteries on the horns must be more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle of the head, and this is its form.
dou cautere dou chief	For cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head and extends to the eye, and the head is purged with moisturizing medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned in the division of diseases are performed but do not help: then make cauteries in two ways, namely with medicine fire and hot iron.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with medicine fire is done thus: take an onion, remove its skin and crush it into two parts on the heads, then make a cut in the temple where the pain is felt so that you can place the onion under the skin; and when it is placed, tie it tightly and leave it like this for twelve hours; then untie it and remove the onion, leaving the wound like this for two or three days; then put on a cloth moistened in butter until it falls off.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointment until it is healed, and if you see fit to use some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is performed in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of which there is a mold here:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called a 'claw' because the head is shaped like a claw with a slight curve and a small point in the middle; and place it on the painful spot, holding your hand steady while turning the iron lightly until half of the width of the heart has been burned; then lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is behind, and there will be an abundant flow of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, put cotton soaked in water on the spot for three days; then put cotton moistened with butter and afterwards treat the spot with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this wound with the cautery called 'cutter', use only its point, taking care not to touch the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
de emigraine	Of migraines
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraines as we have previously discussed in the division of illnesses, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries mentioned earlier in medicine do not benefit them at all, then you must heat the cautery called "cauterium" until it is white; and place it thus on the painful spot along a line half the length of two fingers, and once remove your hand so as not to cut the artery too deeply and reach the bone; and beware of the mandible that moves when chewing, and let the nerve only touch the muscle and prevent spasm from coming upon the patient, and beware of blood flowing from the artery when it is cut, or else have great fear especially if you are not skilled and experienced in this; and leave the work half done; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize near the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals. And if you see [this], administer the cautery that we spoke of in the chapter on artery extraction, with the cautery having two blades; this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	due to pain in the ears from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from coldness, and one has opened it with dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in this section, but the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery called 'the point,' of which here is the shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After branding all around the sick ear, or all around both ears if the pain is in both, and moving away a little from the root of the ear after you have marked the spot to incise; and let there be ten points around each ear; afterwards treat the spot until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	Of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	This torture that must be cured by fire cautery occurs only in those that move due to phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases. Do not perform cautery on similar conditions caused by heat and inflammation of the nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this condition of torture that moves due to phlegm with remedies such as hydrides and purgations of the head and gargling, if it does not help, then you must perform three cauteries on the patient: one at the root of the ear, another a little behind the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips. Place the cautery on the healthy part that is exposed, and apply the cautery above the head of the ear slightly below the horns, and another on the temple as long as a finger; leave the cautery until half of the wood is burned; this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the same applies to the scalpel we mentioned earlier, but it should be slightly finer and the blade somewhat thicker; afterwards, cure as I said before, until it is clean.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement and the patient has no fever, then apply four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, one where it is called 'vessels', as we mentioned earlier, and one behind on the mouth of the stomach; and cure as we have said before.
de litargie	Of litharge:
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large drinks and pills that cleanse the brain. Afterwards, raise the head of the patient entirely, and place on the back of the head the plaster of mustard that is written about in the treatise on plasters; and this is the way to apply the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, apply three cauteries around the head descending to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each cautery. And treat it like the others, and if you see it oozing, apply one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, apply two more on the horns above, and treat until he is healed. And let the cautery be called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	Of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and dirt as we have said before. Afterwards raise the patient's head, then apply cauteries around the head and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if more are needed, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, apply four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let them burn until the strongest of the heart is burned, then lift your hand. Afterwards treat until he is healed, and let the cautery be called "olivare" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should only use a fire cautery if they are phlegmatic. First one must modify the brain with herbs and other remedies that we have mentioned in the previous division, when the patient is large and suffering from illness that requires medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate it, perform gargarisms and chewing remedies that modify the brain often with good foods. Afterward, raise the head in the middle, and perform the cautery as we have said before on the vessel and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffering, perform cauteries as I have said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, using olive oil according to the method that I have mentioned.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, perform a subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When excessive moisture or corrupt humors are caused by melancholy and thick phlegm, then perform the cautery with hot irons as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities incline to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something whereby the brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raising the patient's head; after make a compress of well-made linen, like a ring, and put it on the head; and the patient sits crossed-legged, and is held tightly from all sides; afterward present the compress, smeared with old sheep butter; and heat it gently over fire, so that the dough can suffer when it is placed on him; afterward remove the ring inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient each week once with other good governance, until he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	And if you see cauterizing done by making many punctures all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery moistens the brain greatly; and then place on cotton dampened in butter and in goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	Of the burning of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When burning comes first to the eyes with the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something cleansing the head, and guarding against all moisture, and let them sweat or bathe many times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterwards, instruct him to raise his head, and cauterize within the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of fire is on both eyes together, or one if it is on one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are below the heart with each cautery, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stain it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cauter how to heal it; and sometimes one makes a cautery or scalpel below the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	Of the body's tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins or near the arteries that appear on the forehead from outside, and it is seen that they are due to cold surplus moistures, then perform the cautery as described at the beginning of this chapter: one cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on each temple, and two cauteries behind the two cheekbones; and if more cauteries are needed, also cauterize the eyebrows above the eyebrows with small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Of the body's tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in this division and there is no improvement, then give the patient three cow's droppings to drink at night. Afterward, raise his head, and perform a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery; and perform two cauteries with the cautery called 'clavilis' on both eyebrows, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery so as not to cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called 'olivare'.
de coi ci est li forme:	This is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to make two cauteries on the two sides of the eyes as long as the eyebrows are; and do not let your hand rest there except until one-third of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	On the hair that points towards the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	It sometimes happens that the hairs of the eyes are turned inward and point towards the eye, and cauteries are made upon them in two ways: namely, by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient on your hand; afterwards, press a figure onto the paper over the eyes that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let it be placed at the beginning of the sign near the hairs; then put moistened cotton in egg white and coltsfoot powder onto the eye; then heat the cautery, which has this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing onto the figure that you have signed many times a little at a time until the skin is burned there; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs raised at the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days; then put moistened cotton in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards, apply the ointment until it is sound.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs grow back and the paper is softened, then begin the cautery on that same place again as you did first; and if the hairs are missing, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning medical cautery is what you should command the patient to let their hairs grow long and even. Then make parchment in the shape of a bay leaf; then take three parts each of French soap and live wax, grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then place it on the shape you have made like a bay leaf, and put it on paper over the eyes; and if the patient holds only one eye, operate on one, and if both, on both; and put moistened cotton under the eye in an egg shell; and let the head of the patient be in your hand and place your two fingers pointing at the medicine, and press the pouch and move it every time the patient feels burning from the medicine, for he feels burning like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the cauterization is complete, then lift the burning coal and observe if the paper lifts up as it would have been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply the medicine again to the spot where the medicine did not act until your actions are even and your eyes steady; then place cotton dampened in butter so that the burning coal is extinguished. After that, cleanse the area with ointment called "diaphoresis" and others until it is clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must take great care in your work so that no medicine gets into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes moist afterwards, and the hairs prick in the oil, then begin the medicine again on that spot softened by the paper properly, just as you did before. After that, cleanse it until it is clean; and this is the method of the cautery for warts.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this let your restraints be adjusted; and may not the straight way be replied to him whose study is this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then you must perform a cautery on it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your hand; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or turn their head. Afterward, put moistened cotton on the eye or in a mixture of egg white or persillade juice. Then heat the cautery which is shaped like this: and raise it to the head as if it were the shape of a pigeon's feather, together with the cautery. If you see, point it from one end to the other, and if you see, make it like a tent; but in any case, that which is raised works better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, remove the corruption and dryness; and if it is closed, open it and bring forth the bowels; afterward place a hot cautery upon it, and keep your hand on the cautery at the part towards the nail above the eye, so that your hand does not act foolishly; and insert the cautery into the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then begin the cautery again once more, and another time if necessary, leaving it for three days; afterward place cotton moistened in butter upon it, and continue the treatment with drying ointment until it is healed. And if forty days pass without it being healed, then apply a corrosive medicine until the bone is laid bare; and follow the rule according to what comes later in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of fistulary cautery which some of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Make an incision for the fistula, and open up the location; afterwards place in the opening a thin stick like this which is shaped thus:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make of it the quantity of one third of an ounce; and hold your hand firmly on the stick so that the melted lead does not run into his eye; and it is necessary to put on the eye of the patient moistened cotton in egg whites or in oil: the lead thus applied heals the fistula and the sore by wonderful healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have spoken of, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to perform a trepanation on the nose and bring back the fistula to its proper place in the body.
des crevaices en levres	crevices in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Cracks in the lips, known as 'hair,' occur frequently, especially in children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these fractures as we have described in sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it immediately on these fractures until it reaches the bone; then clean the wound with wax until it is clear.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the boil of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When a boil comes at the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it causes decay and turns black and becomes filled with pus and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in sections, but if it does not help: then you must take a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards burn or pierce the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and on the other side of the wound; and do this once or twice, after cleaning the wound as we have said in treatments, until it is clear; and if it is treated thus, that's good; but if not, then you must uncover the wound and remove the decayed bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	of tooth movement
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but this does not work, then put the patient's head in your lap; afterwards heat the cautery whose shape will come later in this manner, so that you place a tube on the tooth; and put hot ashes into the cautery quickly, and hold your hand there until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; afterwards have the patient rinse their mouth with salted water, and keep it in for an hour and spit it out forcefully.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was moving is made firm, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupting moisture is dried.
de la dolor des dens	of tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from coldness, either at the tooth or nearby, and remedies with medicine do not work, then there is need for a cautery in two ways: cautery of wax and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	**Cautery of butter is such that you take butter of cow's milk, and place the tip in an iron or brass spoon; afterward take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, then dip it into melted butter, and quickly put it on the aching tooth until it cools; and do this often so its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that wool and cotton become cold in the butter, put it on the aching tooth, and place it on hot iron until fire comes to the top of the tooth.**
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	**Cautery of fire together is such that you take an iron or brass rod, and let it be so thick that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; afterward heat the cautery, whose shape will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.**
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter in haste during this cautery, and then hold the hot iron; this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform a cautery on whichever head you wish, according to what you can manage; and this is the form of the operation:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is full of phlegm and cold moisture, and does not yield to digestion by medicines, then heat the hair cautery that follows this form, which has two openings for smoke to exit from the other side; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice as needed until it reaches the bottom of the abscess. If the abscess is small, adjust the cautery according to its size and leave it on for three days. Then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed. Afterward, treat the area with ointments and dressings until it is clean.
Li forme de la cainne:	The forms of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moistures conquer the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient should first be made to vomit with soluble medicines; afterwards make a cautery at the root of the throat, but do not go too close to the throat, and burn only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then make another cautery at the junction of the neck and the top of the spine, using the kind called 'clavile' whose shape we have shown earlier; burn until it is healed.
de la toust	of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When cough and lung disease are due to cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or shortness of breath, and the disease is chronic, then make two cauteries on the bladder in visible places; and another cautery between the two breasts; use the kind called 'clavile' according to the shape given earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make the fire cautery, pricking with the entire cautery called 'point', whose form is shown before in the disease of the ears; and let there be thirty or more points around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	And after treating the place according to what is said before, make three cauteries each of three grains in this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because of this, the cauteries are easier to perform, since you make three at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reduce the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards have the patient lie on their back and side; then lift the heart which is inside the titillite with the backs of your left hand fingers; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery that has two grains to this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	Cauterize the heart until it pierces to the side, and bring together four figures of the cautery; thus, cauterize with the cautery that has three points, so that the forms of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the fineness of a tent, this is the form of the cautery that has three points.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is added onto this one nerve, thus there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Next, apply the cautery to the broken parts with a wick; then allow the patient to rest, and do not move the member for a long time until it is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, which happens rarely, then apply the cautery to the thick part of the clavicle cautery, or many cauteries pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For when the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach, drawing it away from its natural state, and catharsis increases in him, but he does not benefit from customary treatments, then the patient must be made to lie on his back, extending his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Then make three cauteries under the armpit of the arm, using two fingers' quantity at each cautery, and two cauteries below the two ribs so that the figure of the cauteries forms a triangle with equal spacing between them to prevent merging when they ulcerate; and let the cauteries be deep enough to reach both parts of the heart, with the figure of the cauteries following this form precisely.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form, and whoever fears that cautery should cauterize by pricking and pressing upon the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you see fit; then cauterize to the full extent of the cautery called "the point.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound we had before, once it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	If liver pain arises from coldness and moisture and excessive windiness, causing it to lose its natural complexion due to excesses; and despite the treatments we've mentioned in divisions, the patient finds no relief, then the patient should be bled on their left side; And there are three cauteries to be applied according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondria, where the ribs meet; And each cautery should have the width of two fingers between them; And the cauteries should be long, not pressing too hard with your hand throughout; And only half of the chest should be burned, and the patient should stand on their right foot; And if they cannot stand, then lie down, extend legs, and raise arms; This is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if it is your will, then cauterize these cauteries of the cutter, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and ensure that you do not burn all the heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and let it not come near the eye, for the heart is very subtle there, and know this for certain.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the skin: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too intense; and if it is in the skin, they feel fierce pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment fails the doctors, it is necessary for the patient to be seated on their head; and then hold firmly the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery that resembles a ray, of which there is the form below:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the heart is burned, and go as far as the sphincter, until the passage is entirely open; afterward, treat according to the treatment of the veins until it is healed; and only those who have studied medicine at length should use this cautery, through whose hands these diseases have cured many times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he may boldly operate, yet still it seems to me that it is better to let them alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Regarding the cautery for the lungs
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for pleurisy one should make cauteries with the roots of aristologus (a type of plant), and in this manner: Take a root of aristologus as long as possible, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and long as your two fingers; and soak it in oil, and take it to the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the armpit and the neck, and two small cauteries a little lower down on the part that is under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining somewhat behind; and one cautery in the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on either side of the breast away from the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it openly, just as you would with perfume.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancients said that certain people used to use a fire cautery similar to a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; and if pain occurs, as we have mentioned in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies suddenly, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse according to what we have said regarding its divisions and remedies, but it does not improve, then there are three kinds of cautery that can be used.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which the first manner is that you make three or four cauteries along the length of the mouse, following the figure of the liver cautery that we have mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand throughout the cautery, and let the patient lie constantly on their back; and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the heart that is near the mouse, where the ribs of the patient come towards the left, and let the elevation by which you raise the heart be according to the height of the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After this, insert the two burning irons so that the heart is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, thus having four in total. If you see fit, cauterize all of it with three irons.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After this treatment, if there has been putrefaction for a long time, it is better that the others mentioned before are done.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not useful for dropsy unless it is done in the manner called "ascites.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help at all, then you must perform four cauteries around the belly button, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one near the navel, two behind the back on the spine, and one in front of the breast; and let the cauteries be close to the edge of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, leave the cautery open to expel long-standing putrefaction and do not neglect the treatment of the patient after the cautery; then healing will hasten, with both intentions being together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is that which we have shown before; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what has been placed here.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet of someone who is dropsical are swollen and filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; and raise your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deep, lest you break through the yellow water, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the shinbone; and let the cauteries be long, one in front below the knee and the other behind in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open for a long time without dressing them until the water runs out; afterwards apply the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	Of the dislocation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When a stomach ailment arises from coldness and moisture such that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by usual methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly despite their strength, then make a large cautery on the stomach as spoken of earlier regarding the stomach cautery, along with four subtle cauteries around the belly button like so many little nails, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moistures and the patient is suffering, make one cautery on the hip, and one on each thigh, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one; for the treatment is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as mentioned earlier but without benefit, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, the one directly opposite the nape of the neck and two below the navel; and if you think that the stomach is cooled and the flesh not cooked, and the face appears swollen, then make one large cautery on the stomach as mentioned earlier, another on the liver, and another on the mouse with each cautery like a little nail; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After, heal the place until it is sound.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut into the fleshiness which is named "thelul", then heat up the cautery that seems like a razor, and then place it entirely ablaze upon that cut fleshiness; and let your hand remain there until the cautery reaches the beginning of the vein where blood flows. Do this once or twice, and if there is much fleshiness, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards, heal with ointments useful for healing until it is sound; and if you cauterize with a large cautery upon fat fleshiness, it will have greater benefit.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its proper place, then comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When someone has a fistula and it is inflamed and filled with putrid matter and corrupt moisture, then you should probe it carefully throughout its entire length, ensuring that you know the full extent of its depth.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to how much the tent has entered. Then continue applying the cautery until those rotted and corrupted bodies are burned once or twice or three times depending on what is needed; be careful not to burn the nerves that are within and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula leads to the body of the bladder and the intestines, be careful at these locations and only perform cautery on thick flesh. Consider that it is not permeable; afterwards, treat the area until it is clean, and if the location is sealed and the matter has been removed for a long time, know that the location is entirely healed. And if the matter has not been removed, know that the location is damaged, and the bone at the front is rotted; thus one of these things will happen which we will discuss in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the kidneys, and there is great windiness, and no desire for sexual intercourse, then you must perform a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with the clavicle cautery that we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and they will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is cold and weak due to moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then perform a cautery on the lower part of the bladder where the pubic hairs begin, one on the right side and one on the left, each cautery being as long as a grain of wheat; and also perform one cautery behind the back if necessary; and let the cauteries be made with the clavicle cautery according to the shape mentioned before.
de la marris	Of the womb
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow conception because of it, and the flowers are corrupted and their periods delayed; and when they do come, there is great pain: then one must perform three cauteries around the navel as we have said for the bladder cautery, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be made with the clavicle cautery as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hair
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When moist viscous humors descend to the bladder of the hair, and due to this it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh appears longer than the other when measured together; and the place of division is found empty, then you should cauterize the patient on the bladder of the hair with a cautery resembling a circle, and press before the place around the bladder as it turns, so that the bladder is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present, then make three large olive-shaped ones, and let the cautery be as deep as all the hearts; and perform the cure until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the hair
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the bladder of the hair, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is not cured by what we have said regarding division and the cure does not help, and the illness is chronic: then you must purge the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After this, perform cautery. There are two methods of cautery:
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is of many kinds, one of which is such that you apply three triangular cauteries according to this form on the scrotum, with good depth and width, keeping space between each cautery about the size of two fingers, and let them be olive-shaped. Sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on top of the head of the scrotum, for which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, apply the cautery at the cautery of the circle that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the scrotum; but do it in such a manner that the circle contains all the scrotum, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when the pain resides in the scrotum and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it reaches the thigh and leg, apply two cauteries where the patient feels the pain, and one cautery above the ankle on both sides slightly on the left; let the cauteries be shaped like a scalpel, and burn the thickness of the heart. And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers from the foot or near it, apply cauteries there three points or four at the point called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if more is needed, then he should do it; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, he should make a cautery using the cutting cautery or circular cautery, and be sure in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and thus cause the patient greater harm and scarring.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it on so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted altogether.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the abdomen which caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise say concerning the cautery of the groin: this is the manner to make it - let it be made of such iron that at its head it is as thick as a large hazelnut or somewhat less, and let it be perforated with holes evenly spaced, each hole being as wide as the thickness of a goose quill; and let the holes be rounded on both sides like nuts, and let there be one well-made handle for it. This is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	**And let it be heated until it is completely red and glowing hot, and then place it on the box of the sick person's hair, turned towards their sound side; and cauterize once with fire, the cautery should remain for three days; and then make an emplaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healed.**
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	**Albucasis says that we do not use this cautery much because of its fearsome appearance, and we see few who employ it; nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries, which can be endured where it affects.**
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	**The burning cautery is such that you make one instrument with intersecting parts in which the edges of the door slide down, and it should be made of brass or iron on one long side, two fingers high at the top, each with the quantity of the thickness of a finger between them; and they should be open at the front and above, joining together in this form:**
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the box of the herb on the patient lying on their healthy side, press your hand firmly onto the box of the herb; then place between the two circles of the hot awl that has been heated in the fire for one hour, and allow the patient to endure the heat and burning sensation.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there will be a biting sensation like fire; and when the biting sensation has passed, remove your hand with the instrument and lift the hot herb compress, leaving it for three days. Then apply butter until the blackened area is gone; leave for another three days to draw out corruption. This would be the final assistance after treating with ointments once it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make one instrument similarly for the awl as you did for the herb compress. This is the manner of the hot awl, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicklime and live coals, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and place them in nine pots.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	On which there is a small hole made such that the point of a razor can enter; and put another well-sealed pot on top of this pot, then place some sweet-tasting water on top of the quicklime and live coals, until you have about two handfuls of the powder mixed with water. Leave it like this until water drips into the sealed pot below, then take all that water and pour it onto the quicklime and live coals as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very hot and effective for many medical purposes and fire cauteries of other limbs. For it performs the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hair well, such as mustard and honey mixed with walnuts and soap mixed with live coals; all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where a man was healed from the pain of sciatica and thigh vein, and he praised it greatly, saying that no other cure was needed, and that he was completely cured in one session after this cure was performed, as he instructs hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in this manner: that you take some fresh and dry green verdigris, grind it much with a little fat, apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is felt, let it lie; leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then make him enter a bath until his body is slightly aroused, then have him lie in bed, and the pain will all go away and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a cautery with such medications except after an evacuation of flesh.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it helps greatly; and the cautery should be performed in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take flaxseed, heat it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the thumb of the foot and the one called the fleshy bump.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Next, take dry goat dung and heat it over fire until it turns to charcoal. Place it on the flaxseed and let it sit until it is cooked. Repeat this process again and continue until you believe by sense that it reaches the hip joint and the pain ceases; this method of cautery is called "cautere de chievre".
de la dolor dou dos	for back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back due to falling or from blunt force trauma or from excessive bleeding, or from similar causes of cold matter dispersed throughout, cauterization is not beneficial except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has been relieved of fetid pills or similar remedies applied to their back where the pain is located, make three lines of marks with a hot iron branding tool, each line five inches long. In each line, apply between five and more cauteries depending on the strength and amount that the patient can withstand; use the cautery method known as "poins" for this procedure. If you see fit, perform three or four cauteries using the midpoint clavicle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the sign of its beginning is that they have a tight back when they rise up, and fear; and you find in the lower spine of the back and in us the appearance which rises above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to treat it, cauterize it with a hot iron according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery touches each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines apart, and let the points be close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treatment, ensure the area is clean according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply a hot iron to any gibbosity near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pains are due to moistures that have spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes on in the feet, which doctors properly call "podagra," and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicines, it is treated by cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the ankle joint, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	If it is necessary for you to press upon the sole of the foot, then perform the cautery at all the cauterizing points that are called 'points'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	If the pains extend to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then perform three or four cauteries on each knee at all the olive-shaped cautery points; and if you need more, then perform more, but do not exceed the length of a fingerbreadth so that the 'heart's blade' is not burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	If the pains descend to the knee and back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	If the pains are in the hands, then make two punctures around the wrist; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, then make punctures on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains extend to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each area, and provide good care for the patient and give medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	If thou dost govern him well and purge fleume, then shall he be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of removing the tonsils
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When tonsillitis occurs and the swollen glands descend to the chin, if it is recent, then when you see him for treatment, let him not eat that day; and let him use things that leave the belly empty, so that the phlegm descends from his belly. Afterward, make him sit on his back between your hands, and tell him to turn his head until the glands are repaired, and align them with your two fingers, and press firmly beneath the tonsil onto the bone of the chin, and keep a sign like half of a circle above the body; then heat the cautery for which this is the shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white-hot and emits sparks.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the glands to their place; and the assistant holds his hand so they do not go back; and open the patient's thighs well, and put a cushion and a servant under him on the thighs, and another under his chest which supports his hands. Then place the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and press with your right hand until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone. And be careful that the gland does not jump out while you are using the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and that the patient does not die from this, or suffer another harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that cauteries for children be thin according to the measure of an egg, and those for large people be large according to their size; afterward on the third day treat the wound with butter until the blister is removed; afterward treat it with other ointments until it heals, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his bandages be left on for a long time so that his eyes do not bulge out when he tries to get up.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And afterward on the fortieth day, when he wants to get up, give him a well-made bandage and keep it on for forty more days; and let him have good rest, so that he does not work too much or guard against excessive drinking and eating, and loud laughing; and if he follows this teaching, he will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow larger, perform the cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and let the third of the heart be burned; afterwards treat according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-pronged cautery according to this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the beginning of the incision and make a line along the width above the rupture, and another below it, and hold your hand in the middle during the entire cautery with a hot iron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and softer.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in some limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in some limb, either from falling or striking, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is worthless there, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called 'point', and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed from the first cautery, that's good; but if not, apply another cautery on top of it, for it is customary for the skin to become accustomed to the nearby member, therefore you must perform the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Of varicose veins
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Varices are sometimes helped by cautery with great benefit, especially those that come from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	But if you wish to cauterize the veins, be careful if the disease is at its beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in our division, and does not recur or remain, but you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the patient; then make five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the forehead, and another towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; two on the two horns [temples], and one behind on the back of the neck; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the skins come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize it on the muscle according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the melancholy is spread throughout, and it is apparent, then you should cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, and one cautery near the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the ribcage and another beside it, and two on each shoulder, and two on the ribs, and two on the breasts' tendons, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the palms' hollows; and beware of the nerves that are above the heel bone, lest you burn them; and sometimes one cauterizes on the wrist bone, and another on the stomach's bone, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more cauteries you perform, the more help you give, and the greater the benefit; and know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in various iron methods.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After applying flour of doves with honey and other remedies until it is clean.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it is not healed, then apply cauteries to the limb according to its size and length; and let the cautery be a little deep into the flesh near the heart; then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is applied to the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if the swelling has been removed; but nonetheless let no one meddle with it unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and exits of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	I do not understand.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called 'albaras' is inflamed, and the power of medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a cautery that is somewhat deep, according to the quantity of the thickness of the heart; until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then treat it with flour of doves and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of crow and blood of pigeon, each one part; and let everything be mixed together, and let it be tied with a cloth, and let it be applied to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stopped, then cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And moreover, the wise said that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; but this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, which has happened on many occasions. And it is much more advisable that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called 'circule', as we have said regarding many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it delays in healing because of the excessiveness that it causes, or due to the weakness of the patient when they are elderly (that is, too old) and they have a lack of blood, or because of the time; if you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries, pressing; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see her pierced by all the cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels faint in such a way that the course of the corruption is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cautery by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than the consumption of a limb, for it consumes the limbs as fire consumes dry logs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate a fire cautery, then heat the cauteries, both small and large, according to what is needed for the location where the disease is; afterwards, cauterize it on all sides until you have burned away all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it rest for 3 days, applying heated poultices with oil until the burns and all corruption are gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of inflammation-causing ointments.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	If after three days you see that healthy flesh does not grow, then it is good; and if not, recommence the cautery on that which remains of the corrupted skin.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this wound has sometimes been cured with hot medicine instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already described the cure for hot medicine in its place. Take however much you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of pores that come at the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Very often at the feet by default arises an illness called 'clot' according to our understanding, which is a large broken thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this illness is in two ways:
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautery of fire is that you heat the cautery iron as hot as a smith's pencil, and let it be made of good iron to the measure that it can encompass the nail on all sides, and that there are subtle edges; after this, put it all hot onto the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the head of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to throw off rottenness; then make a poultice of wild mallows ground with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the place with ointment that is warming and good until it is sound.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they turn away from the body, and this happens many times in hands and feet, then you must bring cautery of hot water to them; and it is done in this way: take a tube of brass or iron, or a smith's pencil, and put it on the nail and its attachments, that is to say warts; and put the tube on so that it encompasses all around, then put some hot water into it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the tube comes to the root of the nail, and can find a deep path for the hot water to reach the root; and let the patient suffer the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot itself completely with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus one does after another, until you extract all those that are in the body, then dress them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	to treat trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from coldness of nerves or quartan fever or other cause, then you must perform four cauteries on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot and one above the stomach at the solar plexus; then trembling will cease, and recovery from the cold illness will be hastened.
des pustules puans	of foul boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes appear on the body Baths or foul boils which come from large corrupted matters
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	then it is necessary at first when they appear to perform cautery on each head of the boil: one fine cautery made from myrtle wood with its point heated in fire or a long root of aristolochia or a lenticular cautery
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes cauterization is applied at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further thereafter, but the excess from which they come is broken off, and they are clean; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When an artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is very painful to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nonetheless when this happens to someone, quickly place your two index fingers on the wound of the vein and press hard until the blood is calmed beneath your fingers and no longer flows out; then put into the fire olive oil cauteries both small and large until they are all red; then take one, either large or small depending on the wound and where the artery is severed, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your fingers, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if sparks fly when you lift your finger off the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another from those in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is completely extinguished; and beware that you do not burn the nerve nearby, nor bring any other harm upon the patient. And know that when blood spurts from an artery, it cannot be easily stopped unless through one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cautery, or by extraction if it is untreated, or by strongly tying a thread, or by applying medications with the power to stop bleeding; and let it be tied and tightly bound appropriately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Those who bring about stopping of blood through the narrow tying of bandages or placing burning things on it, or similar methods, will profit little if at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and there is no doctor or medicine present, then place your index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until it stops bleeding over the wound and the vein. Do not move your finger, but moisten it with cold water frequently, ensuring that it is very cold until the blood congeals, thickens, and stops flowing. Then afterwards do what is necessary regarding cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the cures of surgery
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases for which a fire cautery or hot medicine is needed, as well as their causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter from head to toe, and I will follow the same path in this chapter so that one may more easily find what one seeks.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And before I begin this one, dear friend, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one about cauteries, and therefore greater care is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the practice of this chapter, there are many times evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I caution you not to attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	Indeed, many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	Yet some people become so attached to their illness that they die quickly due to the foolishness they find in their condition and the severity of their affliction; one should fear these individuals.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who seem to recover, saying: 'Wait, I am cured'; but the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you agree with those who come to you with such manner, but place greater care in your honor than in your greed. Do not open yourself foolishly to those from whom you can gain profit and fame, but use prognosis and indication in treating your patients so that they may be restored to health. This will help you achieve good reputation, glory, and the memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear son, may our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if it pleases Him to inspire you with His holy breath, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have arranged this chapter in sections, dividing it into chapters, following what is ahead of the chapter on cauteries which I have already divided from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Of the full head of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the womb squeezes the child's head too tightly; sometimes it is also caused by some unknown reason.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this illness except in children, and all those that I saw died quickly; and therefore it seems to me that it is not worthwhile for me to linger on such treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and it swelled each day until it could no longer bear it; and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture gathered beneath the bone above the fontanelle, between the heart and the bone. And if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you should cut a wide slit in the head; let it be as long as two fingers, until the moisture runs out. Here is the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If moisture is greater and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this pattern:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if moisture is under the bone, and you see signs that the angles of the head are raised on each side, and water flows out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not respond: then you must make three incisions into the head according to this manner
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After closing the incisions with bandages and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it like this until the fifth day; then release it, and treat the wound with dressings and ointments, and keep the head wrapped evenly, and give the patient dry food made from pork broth until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you observe where the opening of the abscess appears, and how the water collects; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the abscess opens, and draw out the water, and make the incision according to your ability; and be careful that you do not cut the artery; and let a vein flow with blood, so that the patient dies from bleeding and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of rheum
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or nostrils, and the disease is chronic, and medicinal remedies do not help, then the final remedy is cauterization with the cutting of both arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you cut the veins, make sure that the patient turns their head back; then rub the spot with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient hold their head down with both hands on the cloth; then look where the vein runs and mark the places of both sides after the ears, then make incisions with a sharp spatula two parts wide until you reach bone, doing this on both sides of the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, place the scalpel beneath the artery and cut above it, cutting as much as two should.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut, blood flows out continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at touch, then measure three finger widths of space, then press down and cut until it reaches the bone; as much blood as six drops should flow out, sometimes a bit more or less depending on what the patient can tolerate and the pressure in the artery. Then examine the wound: if there is still flesh on the bone tip, cut away any excess skin, then press the wound shut and bind it, applying ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	of diarrhea
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When chronic diarrhea and catarrh occur, due to moistness of tears and heat in the temples with accompanying old madness and similar ailments, and medicine does not help him at all, then extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient raises the hairs of his temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens clearly by its beating, and is little responded outside except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responded, then the patient holds its neck with some cloths, then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and raises the place with warm water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatumile of which this is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then carefully scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then raise it with forceps, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath it on each side; and if the artery is delicate, then cut it off at the point of a needle, then cauterize that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cauterized, then the blood will flow completely on all sides.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out six drops of blood from the wound, up to three; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong silk thread doubled, so that putrefaction does not come before the healing of the wound, and let there be a flow of blood; then cut off the superfluity that is between the two ties at that same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with the scalpel cautery up to the bone until the flesh is cut; and this is the proper work if the patient does not have fever and is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is helpful in finishing off moistures: therefore it is more helpful for moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are untied, then cure them with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with bandages, until they are healthy; and if without court of the artery as often as you work there, then hasten to cut by cautery, or fill the place with vitriol and press it with your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you do not have this present, then put your fist on the place until the blood is congealed, and rinse the place with cold water until the blood ceases, and be pressed as it should; and what is quickest and easiest in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cutting cautery from two sides, but let the cuts be well-spaced to retain their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the irons are too thin, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there must be a space of two fingers between the two knives, one thick and wide; then when you have marked with them both places, hold the glowing iron on each until it reaches the bone, cutting open the vein in both places; and let them be far apart between the two heads for this cautery is not wholly continuous all around; and that is the shape of the cautery.
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears from the eyes flow down the veins that are above the brow of the forehead, and medication does not help, and you see the face of the patient reddening, and feel a trembling on the forehead like shivers; and if both eyes are thin and moist so that the hairs of the eyebrows fall out, and the brows are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And the ancients called it 'cure contuse', and you should do this to the patient who has this disease: make three cuts on their forehead, evenly spaced according to its length. One of the cuts should be just like two fingers wide in the middle of the forehead going downwards towards the nose; the other two cuts should be placed on either side of the temples, and you must avoid cutting into the arteries that lie on either side of the temples. Keep your hand away from the continuation of both jawbones, and each cut should be about three fingers wide across. Then prepare a piece of sponge and many cloths for wiping off the blood, and then insert the spatumile through this opening.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And from the incision that starts at the temple going towards the second incision; then strip off all the skin that is between the two cuts as far up as it goes onto the bone, and then continue from the middle cut towards the other side cut, after which you should remove this spatumile.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert into the first opening the tool called "cultellaire", which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other side, that is its shape.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge of the tool towards the flesh near the heart, and the soft edge towards the bone, inserting it until it reaches the middle opening.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to those that open near the heart, and then similarly do in the middle opening up to the other side; then draw out the blood evenly, expressing the area for the taken blood. Then place in each opening a pad of old cotton, and put over it cloths moistened in wine and oil and rose water, ensuring no abscess forms. On the third day untie the dressing, and bring plenty of sage water, then use basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments to heal wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Concerning the treatment of eyes.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When catarrh comes often and you see the eyes thin and small, and weakens vision, with burned papers; and hair falls out, and in deep pain at the head, and the patient sneezes. Then know by these symptoms that this matter and this catarrh come from many veins, and the cure for it is as follows.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should command the patient to lie on their back, then make a great incision between the eyebrows, and another one from the eye.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let it be until the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves that move during chewing; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then open between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton and linen cloths; then tie above with rags moistened in wine and oil, and guard against hot swelling; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then cure it with drying substances that cause skin to form.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to prevent flesh from rotting.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the bursting of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grain, or beast, or mining stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils; or fluid thing such as water and pus and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or other manner of thing falls into the ear that does not fit in the ear nor grow within it, place the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, distill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then apply extraction; and when doing so cause sneezing with mustard powder, and hold his nostrils closed during sneezing, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and elevate the ear.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Fire cautery is often necessary for this treatment; if it cannot be used, then use tweezers to extract it. Here is the method:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it cannot be extracted with tweezers, then use a thin needle with a small double-edged blade; if that does not work, make a funnel of silver and insert its tip into the earhole firmly, then stuff the space around the funnel with soft wax so that wind cannot enter through the funnel. Then strike fire strongly, as it is often necessary to do so as we have said. If it still does not come out in this manner, take some bird glue, attach it to some instrument pointed for this purpose, wrap a bit of cotton around it, press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and strike fire.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it still does not come out despite all these methods we have mentioned, then hurry to cut the ear before an abscess forms and causes inflammation or spasm. The method of cutting is as follows: first bleed the patient from the head according to their strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small crescent-shaped incision at the root of the ear where it depends. Then pull out the stone according to your ability and suck it quickly into your mouth. Continue this treatment until the patient is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer an extraction; but if it cannot come out, then administer the tenacious thin spatula according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this if you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many small incisions. Then extract it with fine tweezers and wax, as we have said, so that the extraction is easy.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, in water that falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sternutation first, and then clean the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on their ear itself where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it drains out through this [incision], that's good
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	But if not, take many fine and light needles according to the length of your thumb, heat them slightly in fire; and have the patient put one into his ear hole, and let it come out on the other side. Then pierce another needle onto the one that is in the ear; and do this continuously until all the water drains out, and then let it drain out completely. If you see, take a reed and put one end into the ear, and heat the other end with fire until the tip of the reed catches fire. Then repeat this process with other reeds until all the water drains out, as we have said about needles.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of an animal, if it is small-bodied such as fleas and similar creatures, treat it as we have said in division. But if it is large bodied so that one can feel it, bring about extraction with pincers; this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the removal of earthworms in ears, when treating it as we have said in division and where treating distillations, if the cure does not help at all, then you must examine the ear in sunlight: if any worms appear, remove them with fine pincers. If none are visible, take the tube described below:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Insert the finest tip into the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient endures, then suck strongly on the entire tube; do this repeatedly until all worms emerge.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey in coming out, stuff cotton around the tube as I have said regarding stones. And if they still do not emerge as we have said, bring about distillations that the ancients have proven effective in expelling worms, which you will find in the section on treating distillations. And if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, here is its shape as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	Whether it's made of silver or hard brass below with small holes, and above for distillation; and to press within the distillation use a well-made brass tool suited for this purpose. Then take a razor and wrap cotton around its tip carefully; then pour your oil or juice along with any medicines you wish into the funnel, placing the funnel in the ear. Next insert the razor with all the cotton inside, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled out of the ear; let the patient feel it inside, and heat the distillation vessel over the fire before distilling it into the ear; ensure it's not too cold, as the medicine would not be effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of clearing the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in their ears; the same applies to adults due to injuries or flesh growing inside the ear. Sometimes these blockages go deep into the ear so they cannot be seen. And sometimes there is an absence of holes, which can be clearly seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes from deep within, if it cannot be seen, is of difficult cure in many cases. But that which can be seen, you must place your ear to the patient's sunken eye; look inside: if you see the clouding apparent, then know this is the form of all this spatumile of which here is the figure.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be sharp and cutting both before and behind entirely full, so that it does not wound the ear. If the clouding is of flesh born in or on the body of the ear, then grasp it with fine tweezers, and cut it lightly, until all that flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the clouding is deep within the ear, then take a fine razor lightly and heat it slightly on the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the clouding about which the patient complains of hearing, then pierce lightly, and take care not to harm the nerves of the ear. Then place in the ear a wick according to the width of the hole, and moist it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Make sure some days that the wound is healed, or you take a cloth and wet it in rose water, and powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear swollen, then you must draw out the cloth and move another cloth wetted in cerote made of rose oil and wax until the swelling is removed; then dress it until it's clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding starts, then plunge a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding which are found in treating distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the flesh of papyrus
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the preparation that comes from papyrus when they are moist and dry: you must stretch them with tweezers and pincers, and cut off with a scalpel its roots; then put powdered vitriol on the place.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if blood comes out, then cauterize it with the lenticular cautery and the cautery after the incision should be moved; and often they repair, because some things remain from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Thunder
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, papers come from the eyes containing things that resemble hail in shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hail," which is a gathering of large moisture on top and below the paper. The treatment is: watch carefully if the hail moves from one side to another, and it's easy to know; then make an incision widely, then gently scrape each part, then take it with tweezers, and cut it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	But if you cannot cut it without piercing the paper a little, it does not harm the patient. And if the split is large, then sew it up and heal it until it's healthy; but if it is small, do not exert force on it because the eyes will soon restore it naturally.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail descends into the ear towards the upper part, then invert the paper and take the hail with tweezers, cut it and press it on both sides. And if the paper is torn away by the incision, it does not harm; and when the hail is cut, rinse the eye with saltwater and heal the wound until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is entrenched in the tissues of the eyelids above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, causing great discomfort to their eyes. It brings forth catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot bear the light of the sun because tears quickly gather in their eyes; therefore, they constantly lie on their faces and sleep thus, with their eyelids moist underneath their eyebrows, giving the appearance of having exinach which opens into the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place between your two eyes and feel the exinach within
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of performing this operation is as follows: the patient places his head in your hand, and then you take a linen cloth and prepare it like a circle according to the amount of exinach contained on each side. Then place it on top; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach gathers within the circle. Then make a small cut in the middle with a sharp scalpel, not larger than the incision made for phlebotomy, and cut deeply until you reach the exinach. In several positions, exinach will come out of the incision like a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull out then a whole piece of soft cloth between your two fingers and twist your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; and make sure you do not push into the crevice, so that you do not reach all the way up to the eye, so that you do not cut it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the crevice, then carefully widen the crevice a little until it opens; then pull it out as we have said, then wet cloths in warm and cold water, and place them on the wound, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are some men who crush it and apply it to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess forms in its place, then treat it with soothing poultices until it heals.
des poilz des papieres	Hairs of the papyrus
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs are born on paper close to each other unlike those naturally found there, and they are entwined, they harm the eyes and cause diseases like habitual tears and softening of the papers and cloudiness, leading to destruction of the eyes. The treatment is done in four ways: either by cauterizing with fire together or by applying an ointment as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery, and it can also be done through incision and stitching or through drops according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper from the eye with your left hand; if it turns correctly, that's good; but if not, insert a needle at the top of the thread on top. And this should be near the edge of the paper where the hairs are born close to these hairs, and pull the thread upwards across the entire paper, then turn it towards the razor. Then make an incision below the paper, below the closely-growing hairs, with the curved part of the scalpel from the large eyelid to the small one. Then remove the thread, and place a small cotton cloth and gauze underneath the paper. Next, press down on the paper with a mirror-like figure, like a mortar pestle, ensuring that the figure is according to the quantity you see raising the divided paper.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if one has need to cut off a large quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is; then make incisions on both sides along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the larger circle down to the smaller; and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert it into one of the two corners of the heart, then scrape it all off; then join the two lips with a stitch using a single thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make dry the excess threads over the two eyebrows with any sticky substance you see fit to use; and if not, pay no heed, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitching with drying and constricting substances, because the paper livens at the union of the wound and its joining together, but stitches are mute (as the ancients said), and this is the work without fear; and there is another manner: it is that you mark the paper with a figure like the laurel leaf, as we have described, with three points equidistant according to the form given here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut those which exceed the small ones evenly according to the form shown here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you do not have the strength to hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with thread, and insert it into the figure; and place another thread next to the large lip, and the second thread next to the small one, and bring together between your two fingers evenly; then raise your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have marked, as we have said, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed; and if an abscess forms on your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointment. And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: so you must use those we have said about incision; but the stitch in one and the other is more artful.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of canthi is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and make an incision inside according to what I have said, and then make two canthi artificially, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula; and cut at the two heads of the two parts where you hold the threads; then bring together one and the other subtly on top of the paper of the eye, and tie the two canthi of the two parts firmly; and leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that is tied will die and shrivel and fall off until it falls by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes a long time, cut with some force, then heal it until it is clean; and when the wound has closed, and if the paper has been removed, and the hairs will no longer prick; and this is the shape of the two cauteries that you shall make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The procedure is as follows: take a fine needle and thread it with one strand of soft silk; then gather the ends and tie them both finely, and let the length of the threads be a palm's length. Then prepare another short strand of silk thread, and tie its ends to those of the other thread. Then have the patient place their head in your lap, and stand near the sun so that the operation is well lit, for this is a delicate and small procedure. Then insert the needle along the chase up to the root of the hair, and pierce it into the paper swiftly until you draw it out above the natural hair. Then pull out the hair up to the chase, and insert the hair thus if there is one or two or three or more. Then withdraw your hand so that all the hairs come out along the chase with the paper and the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the dart is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the dart from below along all the thread that you have ordered there, until the dart comes out through the hole above and you can see it with your eye; then pull out the dart and the thread, close the eye, and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days until the hair returns to its place and flesh grows over it. And if the hairs are few, accompany one long hair from the natural eyebrows, and raise it with that one which you leave, until it is lengthened and then lift it up.
de la porriture de l’oil	Regarding the rottenness of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called 'aleacrati' or rottenness comes to the eye, there are two kinds of it: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting or cauterizing, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of working it is that you break this joint, and separate the lips of it, and put linen cloths within, and keep it until it is healed; and it is not necessary to use in its treatment things that dry out and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	But if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but it works with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or almond water and linseed should be cooked, and applications of diachylon melted in some oils, and a cloth is wrapped around it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you must ensure that it does not heal in the same shape as before; and these treatments that we have mentioned are remedies for this disease so that it does not return in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is called truly 'axacration' and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and split and cautery and similar things; and the way of doing it in this case is that you take a needle with doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, making it pierce from the left eyelid to the right, so that the threads come out on both sides of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above all the needle, and cut with a wide spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns as it should, that's good; but if not, then take a razor and place it in the split, turn the paper, and make two splits on either side inside the paper; let the ends of the two splits be at the two angles of the incision you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are joined together, the figure is like the figure of a letter called "I Greek"; then remove that flesh according to how much its sides were attached beneath, from what supports the paper, then join the two separated parts with a thread of wool; then treat it with the remedies we have spoken of for softening medicines and dressings until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a cut or a wound or a cautery burn, you must make a full-thickness incision beneath the pubic hairs, as described previously; then open the two leaves of one tent-like structure, as I have said. The procedure should be done according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise master prepares all his power to bring back the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of work and tools in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	And suddenly from the pubic region
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this adhesion happens to many men in such a manner that the skin above is stuck with the white of the eye, and it cannot move nor perform its natural functions, then you must insert the point of a razor beneath the skin and lift it up; and stretch with pincers until you cut what is attached to the delicate spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt so that the patient cannot suffer from the spatula causing injury to the eye; and your incision, from which you scrape away that which is assembled, should be light, so that the skin returns according to its natural shape. And all that assembly is healed, and sometimes in the eye they put salty water, and remove it with fresh water and collyrium. Then place a linen tent between the skin and the eye, and place upon the eye wool moistened in dove's dung; and after the third day use collyrium and warm things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	It happens that the nail is of two kinds: one is nerve-like and similar to hard fat, and another that is not nerve-like but is like congealed white moisture; when touched with iron it can be grasped with tweezers, but none can be taken. Both sorts begin near the large lachrymal gland and gradually grow until they cover all sight and light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is as follows: The patient places their head in your hand and opens their eyes; then lift the paper with your hand, grasp the nail with tweezers of small diameter, stretch it upwards. Then take a needle, and insert one horsehair or cow hair or ox hair into it, along with a strong thread; bend the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing it completely with the needle, then tie the nail with a thread and stretch it upwards, and scrape away the skin on both sides of the nail that covers the pupil and reaches up to the head, then cut off the remaining part at the root of the lachrymal gland using the finest spatula and forceps, leaving the natural flesh in place so that the body's usual path for tears is not affected; sometimes the nail is stretched only onto the needle point or thread as we have said; then scrape it away with a soft spatula as described above.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the scalpel does not touch the soft flesh and tear it, and that the probe is not pierced; and after the incision, sprinkle a bit of ground celery seed into the eye, and make collyrium from litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat what needs to be treated until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not brittle and you cannot insert the needle, nor can the tweezers enter, often this type of nail is cured by medicines; they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covering, then open the eye of the patient, and take a light cut with the scalpel according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And carefully lift the nail upwards, and if you see that it is not thinning out and the root is pressing against it, then distill from your mouth into the eye collyrium made of litharge and red collyrium and ground celery seed, and stop up the eye until the next day; then begin the same work again according to this same operation, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing stands in your way with the eye, such as a hot abscess, then treat it with milk, and first cure the hot abscess until it is clean, then resume the work as before until it is clean.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the eye harms it greatly, then suspend a sponge there and cut off part of it but not all, so that no tear fluid comes forth; then drip into the eye red collyrium made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Sometimes in the eyes of some people there grows red flesh which covers the pupil and sticks to the paper and turns towards the front, resembling a pterygium; and the treatment for this is that the patient should put their head in your hand, then open their eye, and coil all that flesh with suitable tweezers and hold it firm; then cut off the first layer of flesh, and continue cutting with scissors right up to the end, but take care not to injure the eye during this procedure. And the incision should be made with the spatula that we have mentioned for the trimming of the nail and the removal of small skin growths, as shown in the form after this chapter; and once the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then wash the eye with crushed barley or distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines onto it, and press cotton soaked in egg white over the eye to ensure that no hot abscess forms. And if anything remains and hot blood overflows and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with things that soothe hot abscesses; then return to your work until it is healed, and do likewise for any other flesh that has grown in the eye like this.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nonetheless you must gentle the treatment of each weak eye with natural means; and with accidental means, use iron tools; and do not touch your hand to any of these works until you see that these members can withstand this work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Before these veins are red and cover the eye, they impair its work and weaken it every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore it is your duty first to examine whether the eye in which there is white matter is prominent and if there is no other disease present besides whiteness; then treat it in this manner: instruct the patient to place their head on your lap, then suspend these veins all around according to your wisdom, and let the bandages be doubled subtly in this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two bandages placed at each end of the body in this form
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then gently press those veins thus and squeeze out the blood bit by bit until you see the veins move away from the eye; guard that you do not cut the eye with the points of the tweezers, and perform this work at midday before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not damage anything but those veins; and when you have done this, then distill green and red collyrium into the eye to corrupt what remains of the whiteness.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot seize all of it at that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it on for some days until the pain is eased and the boil is assuredly hot, then begin again according to this manner which is written before until it is healed; and this is the form of treatments.
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The surgeon calls a fistula "arissati": when you cure it with cautery and hot burning medicine according to what I have said before, but it is not healed, there is deceit in it, so you must cut into the boil where it should break open and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is bare.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is bare and you see the corruption and darkness there, then take all the instruments that are here in this form; and it is called "sharp knife," and should be made of hard iron to its head, and pointed like a file as it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on the site of the rotten bone, then twist it between your two hands and press with your hand a little until you know that this decay has been removed; do this several times, then restore the site with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the site is solid and flesh does not grow, and the body of the bow is solid, and it remains thus for 40 days without renewing or becoming inflamed, and no bad accident occurs there, know that it is healthy; if not, then there is no other remedy than to bring back the fistula to the opening of the nose according to this form: namely, you uncover the bone a second time with iron and with hot medicines, and when it is uncovered, take a drill of this shape, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the drill be tapered to its tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the eye socket, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then twist the drill completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the wind coming in if they hold their hand over their nose. Then restore the site with drying medicines as I have instructed, and when the flesh grows and the site hardens, then the matter will go to the nose; this is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye opens entirely and nothing disturbs it or reduces its size, then you must bandage the patient; then cleanse the eye, then place leeches or cupping glasses without injury to suck, then apply a poultice of acacia and aloe and frankincense and nard on the eye, and then cover the eye with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, double each in four, and then place one on top of another according to how much the eye needs it; then bind it firmly from above with a hard bandage, and begin again with the leeches or cupping glasses without injury to suck; then remove the leeches or cupping glasses and keep the eye bound day and night, and if the poultice becomes moist, then you must remove it quickly; then remove the poultice after the day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, that is good; if not, then begin again with the emplastrum and cloths and poultice and leeches or cupping glasses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	In tearing of woven cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When tears appear in woven cloth, then open it up, and the threads will come apart like grains of resin, which is frightening to see. Therefore, if you wish to repair it, the work is such that you take a needle and insert it into the root of the part below until it reaches the part above, then take another needle where there are double threads in the frame; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its arrangement; then cut at the place of the double thread and tie one part of the woven fabric around it, and bind it tightly, then remove the needle and place a piece of wet linen over it like an egg; and let it remain until the threads stick with the woven fabric, then treat the wound with soothing substances until the wound is healed. And sometimes the wound is held in each part by a circle of cloth until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye shows great prominence, then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes from the front of the eye, and remove the moist albume, lower the eye, and insert it quickly; then extract until it is clean.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the eyebrow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called 'alcunnati' is nothing other than a gathering of bile in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water. And the manner of its appearance in the work is as follows: make the patient sit on a prepared and upright seat, then take his head between your two hands, and move him thus until you see the eyebrow rise above your eyes; then insert the probe there, and do not let it descend or obscure the light, and let the patient see things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the eyebrow is not as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the patient is seated between your hands, then take the spatula and cut along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown until the bow emerges; and when it has emerged, distill into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and honey, then dress it with other remedies until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	From the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have shown the likenesses of the waters in the divisions, and what is necessary to pierce; so work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, far from light for the sun, and bind the healthy eye strongly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if it is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand if it is right; then put the point of the instrument near the crown by the thickness of a barleycorn into that blister of the eye at the lesser lachrymal part, then push the instrument called "almagda" gently and turn your hand until it pierces the blister of the eye, and feel when almagda reaches the empty space; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be to the depth of the measure of the space which is from the prune to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in this paper through the clarity of the cornea, and then place the instrument until it reaches where the water is, then press it under one vein after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If water flows downwards, then the patient sees before them and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a brief rest, if the water rises up the second path, place the funnel with the instrument, and when it is inserted and does not rise, gently extract the sponge by rotating your hand bit by bit; then apply a drop of gemstone water to the eye, and lift the eyelid from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place over the eye a wool wick moistened in rose oil and egg yolk, and bind it with the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Nowadays, we put crushed commin on top with egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the sponge cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are men whose eyes are too hard, then you must take the instrument called "alberti," of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And thus pierce the conjunctiva only slightly, not too deeply but make it subtle, then insert the sponge as we have said; and upon completion of the work prepare for the patient a comfortable bed where he sleeps on his back in a dark room; and keep him free from all movements, feed him light foods, prevent him from moving his head to the right or left, bind him according to his position until the third day; then untie him in that same dark room, test his sight, and let him see some objects, then rebind him until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of treatment or after incision has begun, but rather alleviation is needed because water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess has formed, you should lance it on the seventh day before and apply ointment that reduces inflammation; once it is soothed, remove the dressing and cover it with a bandage for several days, ensuring it remains in darkness.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then gradually leave the house, return to your usual routine; know that no disciples should interfere with this matter.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And someone came to us from the East who told us that in that region they make a device called an almagda for filtering water, but I have never seen one in our land nor read about it in ancient books; perhaps it is something new.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda for those who do not know them, and they should be made of proper bronze.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And their heads should be of this same fineness, and the rear with three sharp corners.
de la char sor le neis	Of flesh on bone
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes diverse flesh joints are born on the bones, of which some seem like scorpians with many feet; and there are such where there is flesh enchanted with foul color, and soft flesh of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Therefore, in that flesh which is soft and not enchanted, you must have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils, pour oil onto that flesh, and rub it on; then scrape off with a scalpel as much as you can sustainably, until you know that all the flesh is gone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be scraped off, then open it with all the delicate instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without you being mounted or aposteme closed, do as is necessary; and if they are malignant apostemes, hurry up and cauterize until the blood stops flowing and all the flesh is gone, then pour onto the bone a little oil and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose opens and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is sound; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is bone growth in the upper jaw, preventing tools from cutting properly: therefore, you must insert a thread of somewhat thick linen, dyed dark blue with indigo, with about one or less span between each knot; and let the patient hold the head of the thread in his nostril with some force, and draw it out while smelling until it comes through the nostril into the mouth; children at school often do this, and it is an easy thing for whoever wishes to do it; then hold one end of the thread that comes out of the nostril with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and pull gently in turns, as we who are experienced do.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the knots have rotted away that flesh, then pull out the thread, squeeze out the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian oil, and reinsert it into the nostril as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has rotted away all remaining flesh; and then place a hot cautery made of lead in the nostril for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the tool for purging the head, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And whether it's made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp like a candle, with the wick also; and if you wish, make it enclosed like a candle, and let the utensil be full to purge the head; and have many holes at the top to hold it when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh on the bone
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called 'telul' appears on the head of the bone and grows large until it is visible; therefore you must cut it at its beginning and remove all furrows, then apply the cautery or burning medicine. But if it is delayed to be cut until it becomes large, pay attention if it is hard, dark colored, and lacks sensation: do not touch it with iron for it is an infected boil that brings great harm to the patient when cut; but if the boil has a soft texture, not dark colored, and can be completely cut out, then the patient will recover without fear of infection. After cutting, treat the wound with drying and constricting remedies.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and cauterized
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when swelling occurs in one of these cartilage operations, it does little good unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then sew the two lips together at a stitch, then treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, then you must scrape all the parts of their kernel until they heal, then assemble the two lips at a stitch, and bind them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and crushed incense; and place over the powders a piece of strong plaster or other adhesive plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of stitching is as follows: either by needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	Of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	For many people, hard abscesses appear inside the lips, resembling grains of millet, small and large; therefore you must turn the lips and cut on each knot, taking it with tweezers and cutting in every part; then sprinkle powdered vitriol in the place after incision until the blood is stanched; and then apply a poultice of mustard, and cure the place with dry things until it is clean.
de la char des gencives	Of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times flesh adheres to the gums, which the ancients call 'albus'; therefore you must hold it with forceps and cut at its root, allowing the blood to flow freely; then put powdered vitriol or other restrictive and drying powders on the place; and if that flesh returns after incision, which often happens, cut it again and cauterize it: for it will not return after being cauterized; these are the tools used for cutting.
des sordens	of disorders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes tartar accumulates at the front of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and sharp scales that are ugly; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish-brown and worm-like, so much that corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth stink; thus you must make the patient sit down between your hands, and their head be in your lap, and scrape the tartar off until nothing remains; and likewise for darkness and green color, and yellowness and other stains, until they are cleaned; and if what was done on the first day is correct, that's good; but if not, then start again on the second day and third day, until you have everything scraped; and know that teeth require different forms of instruments to scrape according to what the work shows, because the shape of the scraper used to clean between teeth is different from those used to scrape tartar off the front of teeth; and these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat a toothache that you delay pulling it out as long as you can, because this should not be done at all; for it is a very noble substance until there is no excuse for removing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to have the tooth pulled, you must be certain about the wobbly tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain leaves the patient, and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and have the good tooth pulled; yet still the pain does not depart, until the bad one is extracted, for we have seen this happen often. And when you are sure about the wobbly tooth, you must scrape around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gum on all sides. Then move it slightly with your thumbs or fine forceps bit by bit, until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp it with the forceps; and have the patient's head between your knees, holding it steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take some of these tools and gently place them on each side, and use the lever as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and loose, you must fill the hole with bandages where the piercing occurred; and gently grasp it with forceps so that it does not break while extracting; and there must be much bleeding around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be sure not to break it off and leave a piece behind, for then the patient will experience greater pain due to the malice of the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And do not act like the ignorant barbers who through haste and recklessness sometimes break off the root and fail to perform what we have mentioned; but they often cause great illness through neglect of the roots that remain or breaking off the root, as we have seen many times. And when the tooth is pulled out, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then fill the place with powdered vitriol; and if this does not work, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the tools with which one first moves the teeth should be long-pointed and thick-necked, so that they do not double over when you pull on the tooth; these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of thick members so that they do not bend while pulling, and made of good iron and well-made, and serrated for gripping.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains during pulling, you must place on the spot a small piece of cotton moistened with butter for one or two days,
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the spot is softened, then insert the tongs called 'algefri', with which the head resembles a parrot's beak; and let them be hollowed out inside like a file, this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots still will not come out with all these tongs, then uncover the flesh all around the root, and insert the instrument called 'althali', that is to say, a lever; this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out by this, that is good; if not, then help yourself with all the tools, of which the forms come later:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And also use this tool that has two rings, of which there is a drawing here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron implements that are in front in the reason of the teeth, and of this tool that resembles large tongs, of which there is a drawing here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this tool be strong so that it cannot break, and know that there are many tools for teeth; and also other tools that are not listed here; and the wise master finds his own tool according to what his works and the sickness show him, for there are such diseases where the old ones did not teach any tool due to their diversity. And if one breaks the cartilage or the other bones where it could fit, then he seeks out the tools that are needed, which I have told you about, and helps himself with gestures, of which there is a drawing here:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone, so it does not slip away but can hold and remove it; then restore it to its proper place with appropriate medicines. And if there is rot in the bone, even if it is small, remove it all with this instrument
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	If teeth appear not according to the body's natural shape and their form is ugly, especially in virgin women, it is necessary for you to know if the tooth is too close behind the tooth and not in its proper place, so that neither pulling nor filing can be done: then scrape it; and if it is against the tooth, take this instrument of which there is a shape here, resembling a small beak made of steel sharpened on top.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And strike the cap gently day after day to harden the tooth and so that you do not move the others; and if it is apparent enough to be filed, then file it with a fine file like this one.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is like the whetstone on which needles are made; and on this stone one should strike the tooth gently and frequently over several days until it ceases to move. Then, at the end, smooth it with any blade or rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and wounds the tongue, one must grind its sharpness until it is even so that it does not wound the tongue nor distort speech.
quant li dent lochent	When teeth lock
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth lock, either by impact or by falling, and the patient cannot bite down on food without it hurting, and you have treated them with constricting medicines but it is ineffective, then one must constrict them with a gold thread, for silver threads become green and rot, but gold never changes. The thread should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth. And if you see that the teeth are crooked, take the thread and double-ended pliers, place them between two healthy teeth, then insert the ends between the loose teeth, one or more, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. Then start wrapping again from where you began, tightening your hand subtly but firmly so that they do not move. And secure the knot at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the ends of the thread with pliers and bring them together, then place them between the sound teeth without injuring the tongue; then hold it as tight as possible until it can remain there, and if it loosens or the threads break, then bind it with another thread; thus it will remain and serve throughout its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two sound teeth and the two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, one should replace it in its place gradually, as we have said; and only those who are wise and skilled should undertake this, and sometimes a tooth made of cow bone is fashioned and placed where there is a gap, and it is secured as we have described, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut the tie of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this tie occurs naturally under the tongue at birth or due to a healed wound; and its treatment is such that you open the patient's mouth and hold their head in your lap and lift the tongue; then cut the nerve tie from its width until the tongue is freed from its attachment, and if there is any hardness or knot, which is from a healed wound, then insert the nail and cut it from its width; and make sure that the incision is not too deep to avoid damaging the artery beneath; and when you have done so, rinse the area with rose water and hyssop, or cold water, then place a linen cloth under the tongue each night to prevent the wound from healing.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, place powdered vitriol on the wound. If the blood continues to flow, cauterize it with a slow-burning cautery that is good for this purpose. Then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a boil that is colored red or black or hard, but the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer. And if it leans towards blenching and there is moisture, throw oncinum powder on it, then make an incision with a sharp scalpel and release it from both sides. If blood flows during your procedure, apply powdered vitriol until it stops bleeding, then return to your procedure until all the boil has been treated. Then lift the wound with silk thread and needle, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	Abscses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes small lumps called 'godath' appear in the throat, which are properly called tonsils. When you treat them as we have described in our division, and they do not heal, beware: if it is a hard abscess with a red color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the discharge of blood; but let it become ripe, and then you will break it where it would naturally break; and if it is white in color and the root is subtle, have the instrument ready to cut, but first make sure that the abscess is warmly resting and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit facing the sun, with their shoulders in your lap. Open the mouth and take the tongue between your hands, pressing it down with this instrument, whose shape is shown here. It should be made of silver or fine brass, like a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	When you press the tongue with this instrument and see the abscess, take the lancet and insert it into the root of the abscess, then twist it upwards as much as possible. Draw out some of the pus with it, then cut the abscess with the instrument whose shape is shown here, resembling a pair of forceps; but their tips are bent towards each other, sharp, made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument available, then use tongs instead, of which there is a diagram here.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other. And when you have cut one of the tonsils, then cut the other in the same manner, and afterwards the patient should gargle with warm water and salt water, and if bleeding occurs, the patient should gargle with water in which granet apple skins or myrtle leaves have been cooked, or similar things, until the blood is staunched. Then dress the wound until it is clean. And sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so cut them also in this manner similarly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman who had an abscess that was almost entirely inside her throat, namely one about the size of a pea. Her throat was nearly completely closed so that she could not exhale through the obstructed passage, nor could she eat or drink, and if she had remained like this for one or two days she would have died.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was then so large it had been placed between two rains through two holes of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then hastened and placed one incising iron into the first hole of the nose, then drew it out with great effort, taking along a large portion of skin; then I inserted another iron through the other hole of the nose, opened its mouth, and pressed down on its tongue; after that, I inserted the iron into this abscess, cut off one part, and only a little blood came out; thus, the passage to the woman's throat was opened, and she began to drink water and then wine, and for a long time, I did not cease cutting at this abscess; and yet the abscess continued to grow back, filling up the place that I had emptied, becoming very large again; therefore, I cauterized it inside the throat: thus, it remained without growing; and I left these parts, and I do not know what God did with her afterwards.
de l’uve	Of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When rheum descends to the eye and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; but if it is below and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help at all, and you see that the main abscess has calmed down, but it is subtle, then you must cut it out; and that which is round and gathered but not long; and if it is sanguineous or of a reddish color or black, then you must avoid incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient thereby.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it according to its appearance and length, make the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument that we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, draw it out underneath, and cut it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of both mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut more fire than the surplus that is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, you harm the voice and speech. And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two kidneys, and treat until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears the cutting, then you must use something at the cautery for the senses that cause fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of the cautery is acute heat.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue with the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, cauterizing with a thin iron heated with fire, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and with this movement of the instrument, here is its shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it has at its head a small vessel where you put the medicine, like a spoonful of water, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eyelid. And let the patient lie on his side so that saliva and mucus flow out of their mouth away from the medicine, so that it does not reach the throat or the eye. Then hold your hand over the medicine for the length of half an hour, until you see it turn black and the burning sensation of the medicine has ceased. And if necessary, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with all the cotton onto the eyelid until the cotton touches the eye. Repeat this several times until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry and fall off after four or five days. And if you need to restart the cautery of the medicine, do so, and afterward wipe around the eyelid with cotton soaked in butter, clean what has gathered from the medicine; and rinse with cold water, gargle until healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more delicate than incision or cautery. If treated by fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and dittany and similar herbs, and gather them all together or some of them into one pot, and place it upon it, and let it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot there should be an instrument made like this.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And let it be of silver or brass, and let one of the heads be placed in the mouth of the sick person until the vapor reaches the ulcer through the canal, until the ulcer is killed. Afterwards begin again often until the ulcer becomes dry, and make sure that you do not do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many things can happen there; and do not do it too late after the decline of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a cane and place an egg shell on its head, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the egg shell does not let steam burden the mouth, and it is good treatment together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times there is a bone or fish spine stuck in the throat or any other thing. Therefore you must pull out those that you can see, and press the tongue with sunlight using all the instruments so that you may see the movement of the thing; and those that you cannot see and are lodged in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the thing will be expelled by vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of flax, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread, tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it reaches its place, it will catch on, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out from what we have said, then take an instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And bend the instrument towards its tip so that it may enter the throat more easily, and hold your head up high; and ensure you do not touch the epiglottis, so as not to cause choking, nor push the bone inside; let the patient themselves insert the tool, so they know where the thing is inserted; if it enters too deep, draw it out evenly along its entire length until it is fully withdrawn.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the opening of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never treat the wound in the throat with medicine as I mentioned earlier by applying remedies. But if this does not help, then look into the patient's throat towards the sun, and press their tongue down using the tool I mentioned.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, pull it out with tweezers or fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a hollow reed and insert it into the patient's throat, then heat the tip of the reed with red-hot iron and do this repeatedly.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient sweats all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, pour it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand frequently. As soon as the patient senses the water, they will faint.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if they do not faint as we have said, then fumigate the patient with acacia gum using the same instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye. Do this many times, for they will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	The manner of fumigation is as follows: Take a pot with live coals in it, cover the pot with a cloth pierced in the middle, and place the head of the instrument in that hole. Then throw your fumigation into it, and the patient should put the end of the tube into their mouth and close their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but goes directly to the lungs. The patient will faint now, and if they do not, repeat the fumigation many times. Let the patient feel thirsty, eat salty foods, and drink no water. Then it will be necessary for them to release by this means.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which to remove the vein is this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved tongs for entering into the throat; and it has the appearance of a crow's beak, and it has sharpness like a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot let go.
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many kinds of abscesses, as remembered here from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision; and there are two ways about it, one being in its own likeness, and those that hold moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for those places where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses in fleshy places are different from those that arise in joints; and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And there are abscesses that should not be pierced until the boil has matured according to its completion; and there are others that must be pierced when they are ripe, even if they do not die according to their completion, like those near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses appear near joints, and they are left until they are entirely corrupted, sometimes the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be damaged, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is near the main limb, if you delay perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the main limb. If it is near the fundament, it should be perforated before it ripens; and it is not necessary to perforate a hard abscess without digestion completed, except for that which is near the fundament, so that it does not penetrate too deeply and become fleshy inside, causing fistule; nor can it heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the sign of the perforation of an abscess that is ripe according to its completion, which is when the pain has ceased, and the fever has departed, and the pain and redness have decreased, and from the bursting and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs. And it is necessary that you make the perforation in a place more dependent than the abscess, where it opens most; and let the perforation be long enough for the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints near nerves and arteries, and in all places similar without wrinkles.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In cases where it rains, according to this member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy location, so it is worth moving that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you prick it before this time, then the body will be filled with its venom, and it is full of much filth; and perhaps the lips harden and deepen.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you bring small holes for small abscesses, small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many cuts according to the likeness of the size of the abscess; and there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut with the heart, and cover them; when they have become as hard as stone, and softened, then one should do like one does for boils: and there are such that are split into three angles, and there are such whose skin is cut like a fig leaf, like abscesses of the armpits; and there are such where a round incision is made, and other incisions with similar cuts.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, such as soft superficial abscesses, you must pierce them clearly; and when the abscess is large, and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at once, but draw out part of it; then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out more again later; do this many times gradually, until all the pus comes out. Similarly if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying a child, or small children, or elderly decrepit men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	However, if the arrow suddenly jumps out with the exit of the pus, which by chance causes the patient's death, and you are not aware of it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore proceed with great caution in this chapter. After you have pierced your abscess, if the wound is small, then dress it with bandages of linen or old cotton. If it is a large abscess with many openings, then you must stuff each one with a bandage so that they come together. And if you have cut off a piece of skin from the abscess and scraped it around, then you must fill it with dry cotton or lint without moisture, and bind it for three days; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is discharge of blood from your work, then bring cold water and quickly, wet a cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the discharge of blood persists, then bring aid and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book in many places. And if it is wintertime, and the place where the abscess is very sensitive, then you should put warm cloths soaked in wine and oil on it. And if it is summer, and the place is fleshy, then you should put cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then remove the abscess and cleanse and dress it as necessary until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is how one must universally know about the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how to proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is that chapter.
des soros	Of sorrows
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When boils come on the head, they are small abscesses, and their appearances are similar to those in cloths, like the yolks of an egg, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	Some of them are fatty and have moisture like chicken, and some are hard and stony at the cutting, and there is no doubt that if an artery opposes them.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting is such that you examine with all instruments called "entromissoirs," from which the form comes hereafter, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, cut along its length above.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, for it returns again if anything is left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if available; if not, in water and salt, and dress the wound, leaving it until the next day.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then recommence the cotton, as before, on the second day, and on the third, until you know well that it does not remain in the night; then treat the wound with suitable ointment, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds much matter, then incise it according to this form: make a long cut; cast your lint thereupon, and excoriate it on all sides, and take great care to draw out the coat which lies underneath it. And if the artery opposes you, do as I told you after this.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And likewise treat an abscess if it is hard, by incising and draining it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cutting into a hard and moist abscess makes it easier, for they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there are some of these abscesses that have no moisture at their head, and if among those I incised was an abscess found at the head of an old woman: it was as hard, sharp, and white as a pebble, and could not be broken; had one struck it with any force, it would have made as great a wound as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other swellings occurring on the head, especially those that come from the heads of children and the roots of ears, the incision should be made as close to the dependent position as possible, so that the bow may easily exit; and treat it as is proper.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these swellings occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin area, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and there are many of them, intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly located within its own flesh, like the nut and the swelling on the head, as we have said; and there are many similar kinds of these swellings.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	Some contain moisture, and some are malignant that do not yield to treatment.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	If you see one that has a good appearance to the touch, and is similar in color to the flesh, and moves freely on all sides and is not hard against the nerves of the neck or the artery or the vein, and is not deep; then you should cut it open from above, and scrape off each part, and hold back the two lips of the wound with forceps if necessary, as we have said for head swellings; and treat it little by little, and make sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and do not use a dull or cutting knife, so that your hand does not slip, and do not cut too deeply, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow you to operate, put powdered vitriol into the wound, or some powders that stop bleeding, and compress the wound; leave it thus until the abscess quiets down, and the wound softens, and begins to decay.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And once the bleeding has stopped, return to your work until it is completed. Then examine your finger for any small boils that may remain, cut them and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the boil, do not cut that boil at its base but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall off on its own without harm. Then dress the wound with Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton wool, then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut off the entire boil, then bring together both lips of the wound and stitch them up immediately, ensuring there is no excess flesh remaining due to the size of the boil.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary for you to understand how to cover the root of him, and draw fire, and sew up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that hold excessiveness, pierce where it opens more; and pierce in the same manner as the one previously mentioned, depending on it, then bring ointments with tents and similar things so that they corrupt those that remain of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment gently to the flesh until it is healed.
de squinance	Of sciatica
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw it done in our land, and that is their writing.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have sciatica, it is necessary that the opening of the throat called "epiglottis" be avoided; and help should not be given by them because all the veins and the membrane of the patient are hot in the mouth or throat or both.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the stomach, it is necessary to lift the epiglottis to avoid suffocation that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should do so below three circles or four, through a small slit crosswise between two circles or by the quantity of the soft palate slit, not in the cartilage; and these locations are suitable for sectioning the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long on each side.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, he should stretch the skin of the throat entirely, then cut towards the heart until it reaches the channel; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then lift the soft palate, as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the opening of the windpipe of the channel that spurts forth from the broken place, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a short time.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed of which one doubts strangulation, join together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and sew up the whole without cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is sound.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be near death, when the fault will appear.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore cut off the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow and breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death. And therefore the ancients ordered to leave the wound open until the worst of the disease passes, which it does in three or four days. And then they commanded the wound to be sewn up and dressed until it was healed; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young woman took a knife and stabbed it into her throat, cutting part of the artery, and I was called to treat her, but found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found blood that had issued from it, and I knew well that it had not cut vein nor drawn fire except in the throat, and the wind escaped through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed the wound closed, healing it until it was clean; and nothing happened to the damsel except that she lost her voice briefly, which then returned to its former state. Therefore, I say there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it appears as a large, dark-colored swelling, most common in women. It can occur in two ways: naturally or accidentally. The natural type has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental type occurs in two ways: one resembles a boil under the skin, and the other is similar to an abscess caused by an artery. There is fear when it is large, but it need not be opened with fire except for the smaller ones; first probe and search with the intrument all around it: if you find it like a fatty boil that does not adhere to any vein, cut it like a boil, and remove its covering completely if there is one. Then carefully examine everything and treat it as necessary until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	Of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many types of us there are, which I shall describe all their appearances; now it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between us and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is warm and holds fever until the ebullition has passed, and the putrefaction is complete; then fever and warmth subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With us there is neither warmth nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the flesh, and begins like a bag, and becomes swollen; and they are according to two appearances, either dry or moist, and many colors they have as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of us, it is necessary that you first examine and inquire with all the instruments that are called “entromissoire,” according to what its form will be in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring into the apostemes of us is that you take in the moistest place that you find in the aposteme, and twist your thumbs little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the aposteme; then extract the entromissoire, and beware lest it leap forth.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If running moisture has a color, then lance it just like you would other abscesses; and if after the insertion there is no moisture, know that it is mature, so cut it in cross fashion, grasp it with forceps, lightly scrape each side and guard the skin where it lies so that you can pull it out whole along with the root; and if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it out piece by piece until none remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	But if something remains, the boil will return many times; and if a small piece remains and blood causes you grief, then dress the wound with some caustic waters, bind the wound tightly, apply soothing poultices for hot abscesses, and continue treating it until it is healthy; and if the boil is large, cut the two lips of the wound open, and treat those that have entered flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beats against you or another, then quickly apply powdered vitriol to its place and leave it for two or three days until the wound has rotted away and bleeding subsides; then return with tweezers to remove what remains of the root.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of instruments inserted; there are three kinds: large, medium, and small. There are three squares called "albaret", one called "breb". They are also like needles used to sew sutures, made of tin, iron, or silver. Those that are yellow are more valued, but black lead is more preferred for encircling fistulas. There are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of forceps are of many kinds, as you see here: large, medium, and small. There are also forceps with two loops of three kinds each, and those with three loops, which are also of three kinds. There are also forceps with one loop only, which are of three kinds; all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these instruments are cutting, and there are some that do not cut much more than one side. With them, one scrapes the nerves so that one does not injure the vein or the nerve. And among these intromissive instruments are the alembics placed in hands, such that the patient is unaware at the opening of abscesses. And they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses them only in charred flesh, such as legs, arms, breasts, angles, and similar places; and sometimes another instrument is made, like a fist-sized scraper, according to this shape, with which blood is stanched.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and sometimes it is placed at the location where there has been injury of veins and arteries, and some are made according to this large shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much so that they resemble women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to treat them must do it according to this form from line .b. to line .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape away the fat, and dress the wound with medicine between flesh, then bring together both lips of the wound to suture, and care for it until it is healed. And if the breast leans downwards, softened by its greatness as happens in women, open it into two ribs above through two similar incisions; such that one holds onto the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from line .b. up to line .g.; then scrape away the skin between both lips, and remove the fat, and dress with what we have mentioned about suturing and powders, and what is necessary in healing, until it is healed. And if it is not healed, or if the incision was not fully made because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; leave it until it has digested the remaining and fat, then care for it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	Of armpit boils
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These armpit boils are types of hard scrofula with rough edges, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture should be incised according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once the entire boil is emptied, fill the wound with soft cotton and leave it overnight. Then remove all the cotton and apply a suitable ointment until healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the boil is similar to scrofula, incise it as we have said for scrofulous ulcers. If the wound becomes inflamed, apply a cautery as we have mentioned previously.
de la routure de l’artere	Of arterial rupture
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is closed off, many boils often form. The same happens when a vein bursts with a boil. If one recognizes this, the boil will be long and deep; if you press on it with your fingers, you will feel throbbing. If it's due to a vein, the swelling will appear red and shiny. It is foolish to incise this boil, especially when it is located under the armpits, angles of joints, around the neck, or in many other places where it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to avoid cauterization with iron, and the one who is at the head should also avoid it. In the case of an arterial swelling under the skin, cut above it; then incise along the length, carefully separating the artery from its surroundings until it is exposed. Then insert a needle underneath it and push it through to the other side. Tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you for the extraction of two temples arteries. Then use an intromitter to prick the point between the two ties so that the blood flows out and the abscess is drained. Then treat the wound with appropriate ointments until it heals; if the abscess is due to vein incision, you must carefully cut away everything that can be cut from the abscess throughout the skin, then insert the needle under the point held by your hand, push it through, and tie it with a double thread so that it can be pulled out on the other side. Then bind the abscess as I have told you, using one of the two knots tied with the thread. If you doubt whether the threads will slip, insert another needle under all the threads along the entire abscess where the first needle was cut, and tie them in four places. Then cut away the excess from the abscess and also cut away the excess flesh, leaving only what is bound. Finally, place a cloth moistened with wine and oil on it, then treat it with compresses and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	Of blackheads
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Likewise blackheads come to the arteries and veins when they are struck, or from too much exertion, and similar causes.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And these happen more often at the joints and toes in all places where there are articulations, and they are harmful blackheads, with a color like that of flesh, and without pain in many dispositions. And when squeezed very hard, the patient feels pain, but not deeply in the body; rather it is beneath the heart. It moves well in all directions, neither forwards nor backwards, nor downwards nor upwards, nor can those at joints be cut with iron, for there might be contraction. But those on the head or forehead cause a swelling on the temples.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the blackhead is small, grasp it with tweezers and cut it at its root. If it is large, suspend it on an onion, scrape it off, then scrape away the skin around it, then stitch the wound closed until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Of large boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes happens in bellies and not elsewhere, and is an illness called "fungus" for its appearance, and the roots are subtle, and the heads large; and there are some small and very large ones; and I saw a man who had two on his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, with no difference, white, with fine roots, cracked open, and moisture always flowing.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I weighed them and found one to be eighteen ounces and the other six ounces. The work of the incision is such that you should observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the flesh is pale and moist with a fine root; cut it with a wide spatula, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when cutting, there are often too many large bloodflows, and if the blood overcomes you, then hasten to use the cautery; and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made lead thread, and tie it around the flesh as we have said, and leave it for two days; then tighten it, and do not cease tightening with the lead thread until you cut through the flesh, and cut it out without struggle. And if the roots are large, there is fear in cutting itself due to the belly, but you can indeed cut half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, ensuring that you do not cut the boil which is of dark color and poor sense and produces milk-like discharge.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	Because this is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the belly swells
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the swelling of the belly comes from a cautery wound or a fissure of the anus, and is on the stomach and in some of the bowels, as it happens with other ruptures, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries, according to what is mentioned before, or from windiness; and if it is due to the rupture of the anus and the escape of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and there is little pain or sensation, with various openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the escape of the intestines, then it is more varied; and when you press it with your fingers, it sinks down and then returns, and sometimes it becomes hard, enlarging greatly at the entrance to the bathhouse, especially during heavy labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to moisture, it is an easy thing, and you can tell clearly when you press it with your hand; it doesn't constrain at all. And if it's due to blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and they are fixed according to a certain quantity. And if it's due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and its appearance shows whether it's from arterial or venous blood, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	Then you must leave the treatment to [a professional].
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear about it, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning both artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bladder, you must command the patient to paint their anus and lie flat on their back. Then grasp all around the buttocks, then command them to lie quietly between your hands. Then move around the area that you have marked with the spatula. Then stretch half of the abscess upwards towards the large bone. Then tie it tightly with a strong thread or silk rope, ensuring the knot is secure. Then open the stretched half of the abscess on top of the ligature and insert your index finger to find the intestine. If you find it trapped by the ligature, release it and place the intestine behind the belly. And if you find the bladder, take it with the forceps and remove the excess. If the artery or vein is against you, then go carefully around, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread two strong threads through them. Insert the two needles into the area that you pierced previously in a cross shape. Then hold the abscess in four places on top of the needles, and if it breaks open, remove the needles and leave the area until it can be properly cauterized and dead flesh removed. When it is subtle and ready to cauterize, then cauterize it as we have said; and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as necessary, and close the wound.
dou chancre	disease
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed in the division the similarities of cancer and how one should operate with medicines, and how to avoid the cure of iron. And we say cancer that appears in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment. The ancients said that when cancers are in a place where they can be cut out like those found on the breasts, buttocks, and similar places, all should be removed at the beginning; but when they are large and old, one must not approach them because none have ever been healed from them, nor has anyone before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operation, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, involves purging the patient of black bile once; then make them vomit if they show signs of repletion, then prepare the patient well for the operation. Then cut out your oncines or cancer and the skin all around it, and remove it all without leaving anything behind. Let the blood flow freely, and press the wound well with your hand or some other thing. If the bleeding makes your incision difficult due to an artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Hydropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the accumulation of water is formed, and the signs of each type, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is treated by iron: only eclites is mentioned; and one should not use iron in these two types: namely tympanites and yposarche, for they are deadly things; therefore when you treat this type of dropsy called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not help, then examine if the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as wind and bloating and similar things; do not use iron here, for there is doubt; and if you see that the patient has strong virtue, and they have no other illness besides dropsy alone, and they are neither too young nor too old, then you should act thus: lift the patient upright onto your hands, and the assistants press the belly outward, pushing the water towards the lowest part of the chest, then take the spatumile espinous in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut in two.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce it thus: do not cut so deeply that it reaches the intestines when you insert it, and do not let it bleed. Then observe if the dropsy has entered near the intestines: if so, make an incision three finger widths below the navel on the right side; if it is due to liver disease, make the incision to the left of the navel; if it is from mucus, make it on the right side. Ensure that the patient does not lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not flow into this weak area. Then pierce all the skin with the instrument and insert it, and raise your hand so that the spatula lies between the skin and the syfac, as when skinning, to the depth of one fingernail or about that amount. Then pierce the syfac until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is the location of water, then draw it out and insert this instrument...
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is like a thin silver chain, and it is of arrow or lightweight steel, and there is a small hole in its lower part; and on one side, three holes; and two on another side, and one more; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes use to cut feathers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And at the head above is the alembic, so that when the tool reaches the water, it should then stop on the tool. Empty out one-half or one-third of it now, for if you empty more than is necessary at this time, perhaps the patient may die from the spirit of the weapon dissolving in him, or he may fall unconscious, or approach death; but empty according to its quantity and strength, and according to what the condition of the patient's pulse signifies. Then draw out the tool and hold back the water, which is held back by the heart stopping up the hole that is on the face, as I have spoken of it, which you should pierce in this manner; then recommence the tool on another day if you see the patient enduring these things, and draw out a little quantity of water. Do this several days, but guard yourself so that not too much water remains but only a drop.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much water on him, then treat with hot burial or sand, and with much sweat or bath and sun exposure, and apply a dye to drink; and treat with drying medicines until he is sound, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the erection
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, it should be pierced at once with a very fine spatula according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then place a thin cloth plug of lead, and tie it and hold it thus for 3 or 4 days. When it wants to urinate, remove the plug, let it urinate, and then replace it. And perhaps it may not be necessary, because urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose wound is small, let him apply the cloth of lead, as we have said; thus it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose wounds are not in their proper place are wounded, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating before they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot enter due to the fact that matter cannot reach the bladder, and this is a serious disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of this procedure is that the patient lies on his back, then raise the head of the penis and cut it like the edge of a feather, so that the opening falls in the middle as it should; and beware of bleeding that often occurs there, and if it does happen, stop it with something that stops blood, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	warts of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these warts appear on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; therefore you must grasp them with a sharp lancet, cut them all around, then cleanse them with Egyptian ointment, then cure them with soft ointment until they are healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the wound is malignant, of foul color and foul smelling, then you must bring fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you've cut it out and if the wound is deep on the penis, with part inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the wound that's inside; and when it's united, then treat the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if you treat them together, the head of the penis is not secure and may be pierced, leading to blackness and corruption in the glans and scrotum; thus all that is black and corrupted should be cut away, then apply a poultice made of honey, flour, and pomegranate peel mixed with sesame seeds. Then treat it with other remedies until it's healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is profuse bleeding, then bring the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps with two conditions together: namely, bleeding and corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you should insert a lead pipe into the glans so that the patient can piss through it; and when the skin at the tip of the penis is tense (this happens to those who have not been circumcised, or due to wound or abscess), then you must burn it with the heated spoon until the ligaments are severed and the head of the penis is released on all sides. If it's difficult to separate them, then burn a little from the tip of the penis and skin with the spatula; then gently separate them, and put a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water between them.
de la circoncision	Circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the same as other wounds in terms of continuity; nevertheless, when we perform this operation by choice, especially on children, it is necessary to do our best work and make it as easy as possible to heal.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their sons, as it was not part of their law, and we only have knowledge of what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For the most part, masters and surgeons who perform circumcision around the glans take off too much skin and flesh, even down to the novacule; thus the heart falters because there are two layers of skin, and sometimes one layer is cut while the other remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Otherwise, the wound opens up again and causes double pain. During cleaning, the glans is not securely held by the tip of the member; sometimes the iron slips while cleaning the foreskin and ruins the operation. Many times wounds heal without needing further cleaning, as I have seen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the process of filing which is performed on horses' hooves throughout their entire length with fine wire, I have found the benefit of experience.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you press your hand, if you file evenly throughout the entire length of time; but let the wire be well wrapped around the hide; and the manner of the first operation should be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the wire around the verge. Then let him enjoy all the ways that you can; then have him stand upright between your hands, and put the file between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools. Then put your hand on the verge and blow in the heart, and draw it up until the head of the verge is inside. Then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then mark the spot with a double thread, then tie it below the knot at the other joint. Then hold it with both hands by the second knot on the pouch and index finger, and cut between the two joints, then raise the heart quickly and draw out the head of the verge. Then let the blood flow well from the pouch to the pouch, for this is the medicine. Then put powder on it and on the powder a cloth glued with an egg yolk tempered with rose water, cooked together with good fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat him again until he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the cauterizing force is thus: The two heads should be thin and sharp; they should also be as large as a hazelnut evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The mistake in cauterizing is when the heart inside flees from the incision. Therefore, you must stretch it with your thumbnail before the place forms an abscess; cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your thumbnail, then use tongs to do so.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it lasts for three days, and the part below the vein is swollen, then let it be until the swelling has decreased and the scab is lightly scraped off; cut it as much as you can move it, but take care not to harm the vein itself.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the place of sudden wound with powder, as we have said in treating powders. If you cut too deeply and it goes upwards, then there will be no harm; treat it accordingly until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Retention of urine is due to the blocking of stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or flesh newly grown, or similar things, which we have spoken of in the division. And if urine is not released, and you see that retention is caused by a stone located at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to kneel on their knees; and place their feet on their back, and extend their belly from the part above the back, and the patient holds themselves up as much as they can. And then the neck of the bladder is forced open to expel the stone above, so that urine is released. And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must perform extraction using all the instruments called "syringe", of which this is the form: and it should be made of thin, lightweight silver, like a bird's feather; and the tube should be one-and-a-half palms long, and thin at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of urine discharge is thus: Take a doubled thread and tie it to the head of a wool or cotton pouch, then insert the thread's head into the syringe. Cut off excess wool from the pouch and place it up to the syringe's mouth. Then anoint the syringe with oil, butter, or egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair. Anoint their bladder and penis with moistened olive oil and cold water. Gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the belly. Insert the syringe further until the patient feels urine coming out from the empty space, which may not happen if the passage is twisted. Then slowly pull out the thread along with the wool pouch and allow the urine to follow the wool. Remove the thread and let the urine flow. Repeat the process with the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When you see that blood comes into the bladder or putrefaction is gathered there, and you observe water or medicine being distilled onto it, then do all the instruments called "clepsydras," which are shaped thus:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has III openings: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see. The raised places are so that medicine can fit well without additional help, allowing moisture to be drawn out and inserted when needed. When you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, place the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw with the tube that is inside it. Then put the moisture back into the catheter and strongly push the tube back in; then the moisture will enter and reach the bladder now, so the patient can feel it. And this is the shape of the delicate catheter used to irrigate the bladder:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or lead, and the head is higher; and below it falls to the breast; then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with moisture that you will use for irrigation, then tie it between the two breasts firmly with a doubled thread, and warm this moisture on the fire; then insert the head of the irrigation device into the penis, then squeeze your hand on the bladder until all the moisture reaches the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle from it, and pierce it evenly around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like you would an awl, and put within it what you will use for oil and moisture and water, and tie it onto the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, by squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	Of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of stone and their extraction together with medications; and we have spoken about the difference between a stone embedded in the kidneys and all its signs, and in which stones one should operate by cutting; and concerning the bladder and the penis; and I will tell you this clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones embedded in the bladder occur more often in children, and this is a sign that urine comes out of the bladder like water in its fineness; and it opens clearly and the patient feels pain in his penis, and he urinates many times and then becomes constipated; and the foundation of most of these cases is weakness; and healing is easy for children until they are four years old, but difficult for the elderly, and it is moderate for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, first it is necessary to cleanse the patient through a clyster, to draw out all the waste that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For sometimes it obstructs the passage of urine.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and raise them up and move them below, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it may fall from its high position; then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward; then search for it and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, now hasten to cut on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall when touched from above, then moisten your index finger with oil of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is fully grown; and insert it into his anus, search for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, move it to the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger and push it out where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out his right hand with the thighs upward, and remove the skin that is under the thighs in the part where you make the cut; then place the scalpel cutting downwards.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make the incision between what is between the thighs and the fundament, not in the middle but on the left side of the buttock; let it be straight on the stone, with your thumb always on the fundament, and cut across so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone; sometimes press the thumb that is on the fundament so that it comes out without effort. Know that there are stones with angles and edges: these are difficult to remove. And there are those that are smooth, round like a hazelnut, from which removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	Therefore for those that have angles and edges, make the incision larger. And if it does not come out, then you must remove it with forceps which are like a chisel at the head, to pull out the stone so that it does not escape; or insert a subtle curved instrument underneath. And if you cannot catch it this way, then widen the hole and if blood flows, stop it with vitriol. And if there is more than one stone, first put the largest one into the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then pull it out, and afterwards remove the smaller ones if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be opened with a larger cut.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And there are two things that may happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine begins to flow continuously from the wound which cannot be closed. But nevertheless, you should try your best to pull out the stone with forceps, piece by piece; and once you have completed your task, cover the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, then bandage it tightly. Then place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil and rosewater and cold water on top to cool the inflamed abscess. Then bind the patient's neck and do not untie the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you unbind it, rinse the wound very well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of diaphoretic and ointment of basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if an abscess appears in the wound and corrosions, and coagulations of blood in the bladder, causing urine retention which is known to occur in such a way that it flows out without warning with urine: then boil your two fingers over the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains there it will corrupt the bladder and harm it; then wash the wound with water and salt and silk, and aid him in every way you know until he is healed; and it is necessary that whenever you treat him, you bind his two thighs together, and apply medicine to the location.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is in the passage of the penis and stuck inside, and urine cannot flow out; then perform the treatment that I mentioned earlier, cutting it many times until it is pierced through by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this to be true.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron rod according to this form and have three spikes forged into one piece of wood:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take thread and wrap it around the stalk beneath the stone so that it cannot retreat into the bladder. Then insert the probe lightly into the stalk until it reaches the stone; then turn the probe in your hand against the stone gently, repeatedly until you can pierce the stone from the other side. Then urine will soon come forth, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the stalk.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is soon broken and exits with the urine, then the patient is healed. And if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, then tie one thread beneath the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the stalk at the stone between the two threads, then remove it forth and untie the knot, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	Of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens rarely that a stone enters into women, and if it does happen sometimes, the cure is difficult, and there are three reasons for this: one is that by chance the woman is a virgin; another is that it is hard to find a woman who knows how to expose herself to physicians, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	The third manner is such that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more hidden than that of the man, therefore a deeper cut must be made, and there is great fear involved. If you are unable to find such a woman, then you must take a young, skilled midwife, and if one cannot be found, then search for a subtle and wise physician; present her with a wise woman who knows about women's lives or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to perform the examination of the stone according to your commands. Pay close attention to whether the woman is a virgin: she must place her hand on the fundament and search for the stone; if she finds it, she should press it down with her hand, and then command her to place her hand on the patient's womb and seek and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder until she reaches the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the penis, where it has moved and can be felt; and do not move her hand above or below the stone, making the incision first small; then insert the probe into the incision if you feel the stone so close to the wound that the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	and recognize the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood flows abundantly, then put powdered vitriol in place and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work until the stone is removed, having tools ready as I have told you for extracting stones from men to aid you in your task; and if blood flows profusely and it is from the artery that was cut, then apply powder on the wound and compress with linen and bandages, and do not attempt this again, leaving the stone alone without pulling it out lest by chance the patient dies; then dress the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat from the blood is perceived, and the place becomes porous, then it returns to your task, until the stone is burning.
de hernie carnouse	of soft tissue hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	RamiCes aqueous is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white amniotic fluid that is beneath the skin of the kidneys, containing the egg; and it is called 'amniotic' fluid, sometimes properly found in the wall of the egg itself, so one might think it is another egg. This is the skin of the kidney between the white amniotic fluid that we have spoken about; and this does not happen unless there is a lack.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia comes from weakness in the kidneys, causing expansion of that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: either declining towards jaundice, or without redness, or black, or white watery fluid; these are signs to recognize this assembly. For if it is the white amniotic fluid that we have spoken about, then the swelling is round like an egg shape, and long like a figure of an egg, and it does not open the kidneys because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess is ripe with one part of the egg, and therefore it is believed to be another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the thighs and the white fat, it can be felt well; hence when you see the color of the moisture, try it on all the intrusive squares, from which its shape is known beforehand.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Therefore, based on what comes after the insertion, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we open it with iron, the patient must be in a sitting position according to his ability and the fullness of his body; then have him lie on his back on something slightly raised, and put many cloths underneath him. Then sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the lower abdomen. Then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the lower abdomen along the long axis near the navel, making a straight incision through the skin down to the white fat. Then carefully scrape off the fat according to your ability; then pierce the fat full of water with one large hole, and remove all the water, and then put on your gloves, and lift the fat upwards; and do not touch the ribcage of the lower abdomen, but only the fat itself. Cut away all or in pieces the surrounding fat carefully, so that if you do not cut it cleanly, the water will return. And if the egg slips out during your work, put it back in its place once you have completed the work on the fat. Then stitch up the two parts of the ribcage with one suture, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by other disease, then you must tie the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the skin around the entire suspension, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if water is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two branches; cut the other part equally as you did the first one; then squeeze out the blood and place moist wool in rose oil on the wound. Then place moist wool in wine and oil over both incisions, cover with doubled cloth, and tie it all according to this method.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and fill them with wool according to this form, and sew them together at the waist of the breeches. Place one end on the buttocks up to the back, and the other at the wrist area. Then bring the two ends together over the hips, and gather all the restraint around the loop of the breeches. Sometimes this branch is treated with cautery instead of iron cutting; take a sharp scalpel cautery and cut the skin of the incisions. Heat it as we have said until the white bubble containing the water is exposed. Then use the cautery according to this form, pierce that bubble several times, and burn it with this sharp hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut in all ways that you can, until you strip it bare; and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more beneficial; and move carefully to avoid blood loss, and move slowly with cutting works; and if anything goes against you, whether it's a boil or blood flow or something else, then treat what goes against you according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then perform a drainage, as I tell you. And when you are certain by the signs we have discussed that abscess water is present there, then make the patient sit on an elevated seat; pierce the boil at its lowest part with the entire spatula wide open, and insert the drainage tube along the length of the body; let the hole be large enough so that all the water flows out freely. Then place cotton on the spot and tie it, and leave it to allow the remaining water to flow out, then treat the wound until it is healed. And if the linen cloth does not allow the water to flow out from the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat hydrocephalic water, whose form is mentioned earlier. Then widen the hole in the wound, and know that the water returns and collects again after six months or so around it. And when it collects as before, then the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	Concerning the boil on the testicles.
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	It should be known that in the cutting of this vein there is great danger and many dispositions (preconditions), therefore it seems to me that it would be better if it were left alone; and I will tell you about the procedure and similar cases of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many boils come upon the body, especially on the testicles; and this happens in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know by acid and bitter fluid that is spread upon the testicles, or from an injury; and the color of the boil is according to the color of the body; and it does not cause pain, yet it is a serious boil. Sometimes there are several serious boils that are pale and white in color, and sometimes they come from an artery, or from swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, it is known by the hot and hard boil that you feel when pressing with your two fingers; and you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made from swollen veins is recognized by his arrangement at the expression of the touch of the toes, and can well make the cut on this kind of ulcer, and on others; but you should strike the heart of the boil first, then raise the egg up high, and wipe the white surface off, and deliver the suspender from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already filled with these veins that have been born, then you must pierce and cut the egg; but if it is on the surface or within those in the vessels, then you must remove all of this fat, and roundly cut it.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is in the back area, then you must cut all of it out, and remove the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are complete, dress the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the boil on the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a boil wrapped in an envelope resembling a bunch of grapes, with softening of the testicles, and the patient cries out when he walks; and the treatment of this disease is quite frightening as the one mentioned before, nevertheless we will tell you its workings according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must have the patient sit on a raised seat, then place the suspensory ligament of the testicles below your two fingers, close to the penis, and hold it gently; then cut through the skin wide and deep with a sharp scalpel, until the vessels are exposed, and then scrape away from each side, as we have described for extracting temporal arteries; then insert a needle with a double thread where the vein first appeared, and tie it at the first location where the vein came out, and tie it again at the other end; then cut midway straight along the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture; then treat the wound like others where an arrow has been removed, so that no vessels are left to nourish one of the testicles; for otherwise there will be no harm, but if all the vessels become filled with blood, then the testicles must be drawn from all vessels; so that the seed does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot help.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of a hernia
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrence of this hernia is caused by the rupture that comes from the scrotum, or the extension on the abdomen in the region of the groin, whereby the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles; and this rupture occurs either in the scrotum or in the extension of it, and these two types come about from many causes: either from a blow, or a jump, or lifting heavy weights, or similar things. And when it is an extension of the scrotum, the sign is that it happens little by little over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly; and the swelling is even all the way to the base, because the scrotum presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign when it is a rupture of the scrotum is that it suddenly brings pain at the beginning, and there are diverse swellings appearing underneath the skin near by, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body passing through the opening of the scrotum.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with the serpent, and are retained within, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cauteries with fire there is fear, therefore one must avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of this operation is as follows: instruct the patient to put his hand inside the wound if he can reach it; then press on his neck between your hands and lift his thighs. Then raise the heart upwards, cut all the long hair off the scrotum. Then insert cloths into the groin according to what you need to open the wound so that the testicle may come out. Then scrape away the skin of the scrotum until the tough white scrotum is exposed on all sides. Then put your right index finger inside the scrotum, between the two layers of skin and behind the testicle. Then move your right hand inside the scrotum and raise the tough white scrotum with your left hand, pulling the testicle towards the groin. Instruct the assistant to hold the testicle upwards and loosen what is behind it. Search with both hands if there is any intestine wrapped around the tough white scrotum, and if you find anything, put it back inside the abdomen. Then take a needle with thick thread made of silk threads, insert it into the rear part of the scrotum after the testicle. Cut off the excess thread so that there are four strands left. Then tie them together in a cross shape and secure the tough scrotum using two knots. Then wrap the thread ends and tie them securely with two knots to prevent any vessel that nourishes it from entering or infection from coming inside. Again, place the knot according to the first one along two fingers away from the scrotum. After these two knots leave some slack in the scrotum underneath the testicle. Then cut into the part below the skin of the scrotum until blood flows and the intestine is visible as described earlier. Then bring moistened wool soaked in oil and put it on the wound, and apply the ligature that was mentioned before.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the whites of the eyes are cauterized, as we have mentioned, after incision due to fear of blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And this happens often, leaving the thread hanging until it falls by itself. And if it takes too long to fall, let it be raised with warm water and place over what we have mentioned until it falls. Then treat the wound with another remedy until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	I never saw anyone dare to perform this surgery using iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done like the hernia that is together there, in such a way that you tie the lips after cutting lightly below, then cut in between and treat the wound with what opens until the lips fall off. Then heal it as we have said until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the groin area, as we have mentioned, and the location opens up. And no part of the intestines comes out at first, but if some do come out, it is little and can be repaired quickly. But if it remains too long in this state, the wound or abscess grows until the intestines come out. This happens due to the expansion of the vein that is in the groin area, as we have mentioned, because it becomes stretched, then softened and swollen with the location opening up. And the cure for this is cauterization, as we have said before. And sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner: the patient lies on their back between your hands, then cut the opened vein of the rupture at its widest point according to its size, then extract the vein that is under the skin next to it. Then take a reed and place it on the opening of the vein, then press it into the depth of the abdomen. Then sew up the two openings of the vein on top of the reed's head, sewing both together. Then remove the reed's head, and do not cut or stretch the vein nor anything else, as I have explained to you in the treatment of intestinal rupture. Then treat it with wound care.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, so cleanse it and heal the wound until it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sinew is tight and has no appearance in the fracture; cauterization is muted here, closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	due to softening of the skin of the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the joints in some men becomes softened because the flesh inside is softened, and it is easy to see. And it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and cuts away the softened skin from the natural skin. Then bring together the two edges with a suture, and if you wish, first sew up the excess softened skin with three or four stitches firmly. Then cut between the sutures and dress it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the threads.
dou chastrement	on castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that castrations are prohibited by our law, and therefore I would like not to speak of it in this book. However, it is necessary to know two things: firstly, the doctor should know how to respond when asked about it and how to perform the operation; secondly, because we often have need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, dogs and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that dressings are made in two ways: either by attraction or by splitting open.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method that we perform by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water until the joints are softened and limp. Then you grasp them with your hand so they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the dressing of the flank: you must first shear the beast and press the skin of the joints with your left hand. Then tie the suspensiony ligament and cut each joint cap one time after carefully scraping it clean, leaving a little fat on the sinews and subtendinous tissues that are over the vessels. This method of dressing is milder than that done by attraction because some things from the joints may remain during attraction, causing the beast to desire lust. Then heal the wound until it is sound.
des hermofrodites	On hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways among men: one way is when between the two testicles opens an aperture like the figure of a woman's genitals, sometimes with hair around it and occasionally urine flows there.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another manner is thus in women, which they have on the vulva like a wand and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for both men and women is thus: you should clean all joined wounds and dress them as other wounds. For the second manner, in men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, there is no remedy.
de la tentigene	Of inflammation
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Inflammation is a joined wound on the natural part which is too ugly to behold; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you cut off the superfluity of inflammation with your hand or pincers, and clean it gently; but do not go too deep lest bleeding occur, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed. And there is another wound which appears at the mouth of the uterus and the anus, sometimes it emits pus, and resembles a cow's udder, hence the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must cut it, as we have indicated for tenacious wounds, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	Of wandering
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Wandering is when the nature of woman is not pierced, or the passage is narrow; and it is innate by birth, or accidental due to illness that has occurred there; or it is caused by flesh adhering, or by thin, dense, or thick skin, and it extends deeply into the uterus, or on the sides, or below, wherever it may be; and it prevents conception and childbirth, and sometimes menstrual flow; and its recognition comes from examining the womb.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If swellings are close to the surface, press them with your two fingers or your hand.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is due to thin skin and is close to the labia majora, act quickly and proceed thus: place your two index fingers together and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then stretch the labia minora firmly until the thin skin is taut and covers the swelling; then take wool soaked in oil and apply it to the area, and have the woman lie down gently each day so that it does not stick.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the shoulder blade is hard and thick, then you must cut it like a bay leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is flesh-born, then suspend it with oil and cut it; and have at hand medicines that staunch blood, such as aloe, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with an egg; then apply a broad bandage of lint so that the wound does not close; and thus let it remain for some time, and cover it with a dry linen cloth; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when flesh comes out in the marrow, then it must be cut according to this manner, unless it is an inflamed boil.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an inflamed boil that is in the marrow, one must not touch with fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are abnormal openings of veins which without custom do not exist, and when hemorrhoids become old they become hard; we have already mentioned in the division their similarities, signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that piles and hemorrhoids, when deeply embedded in the flesh and not apparent upon feeling, are not suited for treatment with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those located at the mouth of the anus, which can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should place the woman in a cold house, then heat the cautery with tongs, and apply it to its roots. Then sprinkle powder made from medicines that constrain blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood and frankincense and similar things. Then leave her feet at the fire for an hour, then place her in cold water. If bleeding occurs, seat her in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall nuts and similar things. Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and celery, and make a poultice to apply to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if she hemorrhages, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, apply bloodletting cups to the back and breasts without cutting; then take linen, and soak it in plantain juice or celery juice with old wine, and apply at the location.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the boil has softened, then dress the wound with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a bitter head, so it should be covered as I said earlier; and then dress it until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	Of boils on the buttocks
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of boils occur on the buttocks, such as cancer and piercing boils, herpetic sores, inflamed boils, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot boils, along with many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I must describe in this treatise the hot boil that appears on the buttocks, which is not one of those boils that suppurate; and if you wish to know how to work with iron, observe whether the boil is aggravated at the beginning of its appearance, and filled with heat and fever, and becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not rush to pierce, but make it bleed until the pain subsides; then make the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats where they can lean back, and support their back and bring their feet together behind the leg; and let their thighs be spread apart, and put their arms under their knees, and tie them securely with a good bandage; then suck the boil towards the right side, and bring in the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the mare, about which there will be more later; and it is necessary that when you bring in this instrument, you first insert the rod to know the depth of the mare, so that what enters inside does not go deeper than it should, and does not wound the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then one must cover the depth of the mare with rags, so that the instrument does not hurt; and it is necessary that they put the horn of the instrument above, and wet the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the abscess opens and you cut it gently with your hand, then you must cover its head with spongy lint; and when the bowels are emptied, you should place moistened lint in oil of roses or dried oil into the wound; and put lint moistened with hot water on the marrow of the bone, and place clean linen cloths moistened in water or boiled mallows around it; then treat after two days with suitable ointment until healed; and sometimes lift the marrows and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then with water where lily roots and long aristologes have been cooked; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has reached the marrow, you must beware of cauterizing with a hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is first necessary that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and you know when to see the woman pressing downwards, and desiring to smell the air: then the child hastens to come out forthwith. Then know that this birth is according to nature's figure, and the head is presented first, with the afterbirth accompanying it; and when you see these signs, gently press her belly so that the child may be born quickly; for when it descends upon its head, then comes the afterbirth with it, and the marrow is cleaned of its impurities by good cleansing. But if it comes otherwise, it does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Because sometimes it happens on his feet, and heat comes to the body or shoulders, and hands, or it happens on his belly, or sometimes, and by chance they are turned onto his neck, and in other unpleasant shapes; therefore it is necessary that the doctor be wise and skillful in these matters, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should aid him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes onto his head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth crying, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or have women hold her; and raise her nature with oil or fenugreek cooked, and then place the little spatula between her shoulders, of which this is the shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the secondine, and scrape with her nail until the moisture that is inside comes out; and press on the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must enema the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil; then make her sneeze with condisium, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will be born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands are stuck out, you must gently push them back bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high; then tilt the seat onto the ground, ensuring she does not fall during this process; and if the hands still cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut off the hands at the ankle that is positioned beforehand, and extract the child, realigning it properly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the exit of the child onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes onto its feet, you must push it up high; then turn it gently bit by bit until it is aligned properly; then take one of its feet and stretch it out gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it jumps up to the thighs, then command her to grasp it, and cause it to sneeze with condition; if it jumps out, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not come out as we have said, then turn it gently bit by bit until it is in accordance with its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Because then it is easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if the fire does not come as we have described, then take musk from a male deer, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar; and put this ointment on the nature of the woman's womb, then let her sit in warm water up to below her breasts; and when she is warmed below, let her wear a girdle of myrrh and place it below her, letting it remain for an hour; then let her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose shut, and gently take the baby out because now the child jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the exit of the child onto its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this manner, then the midwife should gently place her hands on it; then support its head and let the feet hang down, and let it lie on the bed; and fold its hands gently and then put them on the belly, and remove the pillows below to allow it to come out properly; and if the child does not come out, take its feet and move it forcefully, then move the belly up, then place your hands underneath; and gently pull the child; and tell the woman to push as much as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the childbirth issue where a hand comes forth.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to attempt to reposition the hand: if it cannot be repositioned, make the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, have her lie down on the bed, and hold her legs wide apart; then apply the ointment that I have described; and if she does not give birth, seat her on a chair, then attempt to reposition the hand; and deliver the child according to its natural form, make her sneeze, and instruct her to bear down until the infant is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Regarding the issue of a child born face up with its hands spread out and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary for the midwife to take her hand and gradually turn the child, bringing it out easily; and when it is aligned, apply the ointment of olive oil and musk that we have described, then instruct her to move gradually; and once this has been done, seat her on a chair and instruct her to bear down, making her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner, it applies to all joints.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When fire comes in this way to all joints, cut the joint with your finger until the moisture is emptied; and if the child leans on its face and neck, then cut from below so that it is not retained, and the child will die. Then put the child back in place until you have positioned it correctly, and instruct the woman to take any position: then it will come out easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born frequently, and sometimes three or four are born at once; this is not a strange thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	It is strange that two are born and do not live if they are named. I know those that are multiplied are separated by the caesarean section made by the surgeon who cuts them loose from below. And sometimes they also come out naturally like any other child, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out loudly, then heal them as we have said, and let the surgeon be skilled, and do quickly and easily what she does; and thus do as it ought to move towards health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	No more than one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or several up to fifteen are formed in the womb, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the sage's compass. And it is necessary that the surgeon know all this, for perhaps similar things have happened; so do accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman for a dead child in the womb, as I have said in the division, and no force comes forth, and you are compelled by necessity to use your hands. Then you must know whether the woman is of sound virtue, and does not have an accident or fears death. Then let the woman lie on her back, with her head hanging down and legs raised. And the assistant hold her thighs, or tie her to the bed so she is not moved during the removal of the child. Then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oil mixed with altee and fenugreek seeds and linseed, then the surgeon covers his hands with these oils and muscillaiges. Then gently inserts them into the womb, then take one of the tools that are suitable for this, and make sure the child is positioned correctly to descend headfirst. Then insert the tool into its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or below the beard or near the vulva or near the sides, and if it descends feet-first, insert it between the thighs. And it is necessary that he hold the tool with his right hand, and put the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and gently insert it into any of these places we have mentioned until it reaches the empty space; and this is the shape of the tool:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then insert it against the other side once, or twice if necessary, so that the extraction is even; then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other for easy removal, and make sure the forceps has teeth to hold firmly, as shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some part remains, let the surgeon rub some of his thumbs with oil and place them on that part, then pull from the other side; and if nothing remains, then place this forceps higher up and continue doing so until it is completely free.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to tension, then wrap the cloth around it until it is all out; then place the coping in the joint of the sole or at the wrist, and do likewise for the other hand.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the infant's head is large and the passage is narrow where there is an acute point gathered at the top, then place the spatula between your thumbs and cut the top to remove the point; or use the instrument called 'almidach', whose shape is shown with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one. Do likewise if the child has a large natural head; then pull out the bones with forceps, and if the head bulges out but remains tight at the fontanelle, cut it until the moisture comes out from the fontanel; and if it cannot come out, remove it piece by piece as you are able; and if it is swollen in the abdomen or below the ribs, then pierce it until the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then traction is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the uterus is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is narrow in the belly or breast, then you must draw it out with a cloth wrapped on your hand; and open the belly or breast until the moisture that is there flows away; and if the other members are removed but the head remains, then place your hand deep into the uterus, and draw it up to the mouth of the uterus; then place one or two fingers in there, and pull it out; and if the mouth of the uterus is narrowed by a hot sore that has come there, then do not work on it, rather apply moist and fatty things; and the physician should use poultices, and softening and soothing waters.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its side and you can make it even, then apply what we have said for the live child; but if you cannot do this, then draw it out piece by piece, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if it should happen that we said in hot abscesses which come to the marrow; and if there is profuse bleeding, then let it be put into boiling water restricting, and let other treatments be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb one child had been killed, then another was consulted upon that one, and the other was also killed.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After many years, an abscess appeared on his beard, which swelled so much that it opened, and began to have great discharge.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for treatment, and I thought long and hard, but could not stop the bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a poultice with strong attraction on it, and one bone came out, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly at this, for the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought it must be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I cleaned the wound and removed many bones until the woman was in much better condition; and the woman lived for a long time thereafter, with a little bit of bowels coming out from that place; and I am telling this story only because when a master finds something strange like this, he should know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the dislocation to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the compresser, by which books are opened; and at two turns to both heads of the two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle than the restrictor and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the wood should be two inches wide, and the margin one inch thick, and one and a half palms long. And between the two ligaments there should be two joints of this same wood which are fastened on both sides, being half a palm or a little more in length; and these two joints are placed in the mouth of the dislocation to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, which is more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood wood, resembling forceps; and it has two joints at both heads, as you can see, each half a palm long and two inches wide. And when you want to open the dislocation with all the instrument, then have the woman sit on the bed, with her feet hanging down and her legs apart, then insert the two joints together into the dislocation, and hold the head of the instrument under her thighs. Then open your hand on the entire instrument, just as you would do with equal forceps, according to the amount you want to open the mouth of the dislocation, until the ball comes out as she wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all mounted, and their likenesses are multiplied; and when the physician has prepared them, the work becomes faster, and more abundant for men by their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disregard the instrument until you have prepared it, because its needs are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second child is retained during birth, you must command the woman to hold her breath, then make her sneeze with condici powder, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; if she sneezes well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this does not succeed, then take a pot, and make an opening in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the pregnant woman, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cumin, and centory; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water over the fire. Then put one end of a tube into the pot's opening and the other end into the pregnant woman's mouth, and hold it until the steam enters her. Then make her sneeze as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the sciatic nerve jumps suddenly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, then order the maidservant to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or musk-rosin, and then place it on the thigh and search for the sciatic nerve. And when she has found it, gently grasp and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the hip does not fall during extraction; but it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then pulled; thus it will come forth and relieve itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the opening of the hip is very narrow, we have said the cure of sneezing and fumigation with herbs. And if it is not helped by all that we have said, then take care that you do not pull too hard; but it is necessary that what is at the opening of the hip should be tied to the woman's thigh, then perform a clyster with tetrafarmakon oil; thus she will be able to bear it and recover, and come back cured. But still, when she bears it, bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If therefore fumigations are suitable for this, some of the ancients have tried fumigation with mustard and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate the woman at childbirth for the retention of the membranes is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it resembles a cage made of glass or similar material. Insert the fine end into the natural opening and place the wide ends over the fire. Use hot coals for the fumigation, replacing the bellows when they become exhausted.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the anus
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born whose anus has not been pierced and is obstructed by a fine membrane. Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this membrane with her thumb, being careful not to touch the membrane with her fingernails or cut it with a sharp instrument. Then, she should cleanse the area with moistened linen soaked in wine and oil, applying ointment until it is completely healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not remain steadfast, then place in the hole a pin of lead and leave it there for several days, removing it when the child wishes to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this blockage comes from the sudden appearance of a wound or an abscess; therefore cover that suddenly appeared wound: it should be treated as we have said for the pin of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula at the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come beneath the fundament are nodular, and those that grow near the fundament defected, or in the space of the two buttocks, so there is one fistula or several; and when this nodule is ancient, it opens, and produces moist white pus or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are known by the fact that there is evacuation through them during defecation or flatulence when the patient makes an effort, and sometimes worms come out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And there are fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and they reach up to the hip joint, and up to the tip of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one recognizes the fistula piercing at the fundament, and not merely piercing: and it is that you insert your two index fingers into the fundament, and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula where there is no twist.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, then insert a fine reed or horsehair probe until you feel the probe or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, nor does any pus, wind, or vermin come out of the hole as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula pierces up to the bladder or up to the urinary duct, so urine flows out, and it cannot be stopped by medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it pierces through to the hip joint, then the inflammation extends to that area; if there is no tortuosity and the pain encircles around, then it will be gone soon, and no medicine or salve is needed for this; and in these Persian fistulas, there is no cure except effort, and the vain boasting of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	For those which are not Persian and not ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proven, and it should be done thus: the patient lies on their stomach in your hands; lift their legs up to their thighs, with their thighs inclined towards their belly; then insert a bronze probe, or one of lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the inflammation originates.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around their anus, then you should insert your two index fingers into it; if you sense that the inflammation has pierced through there, and if between your fingers you feel either the sphincter or flesh, then know that it is a Persian fistula; do not treat it unless you can heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Some say one can hardly heal any wounds, but this happens rarely; and the aid that one does there, it is heating the cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it is said before; and put it hot into the fistula until it reaches near the fundament; and do this twice or three times, until you know that those broken tissues are burnt, which resemble an feathers quill; and then the cure with soft linen soaked in butter, until that tissue comes off, then the cure with ointment between flesh and wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If healed thus, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it cannot be healed otherwise, and if the thread enters but does not reach to the fundament which is between your two fingers, and there is a thick covering of flesh or skin between the thread and you; and you see the fistula through that which covers the heart; then cut from the beginning of the fistula, and insert the thread immediately afterwards, and afterward apply the cautery until it reaches the head of the thread; and the thread will be freed and fall away; then remove those burnt tissues which resemble a feather of a bird, and nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if blood defeats you, and flows between you and your work, cauterize it with fire or hot medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	And the cautery of fire combines two things: that is to say, the burning of adjacent flesh and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture. Then treat wet wounds with burdock or crushed plantain until the affected area becomes dry, and remove burned flesh from the wound; then treat the wound with soothing ointments and powders.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	And when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	If a fistula extends deep from the foundation, and is distant from the body, push your two fingers into its foundation, and press down.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tension, and between two there is the skin or membrane or flesh where it is about to burst, then make an opening through which there can be trust and hope by using one of these three methods: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut down to its foundation, or if you cannot do that, then place tents and treat it as before; but do not go too deep lest you cut the tissue holding the foundation, and let the discharge flow without intention. Then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed. Otherwise, remove that covering and cleanse it once it has been cut near the foundation with a tent or other pointed instrument. Then clean the damaged flesh in the wound as much as you can. Then strive to heal the wound, and keep the fistula away from the foundation: this will make things easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula and it is located on the side near the fundament close to the skin above, then take a probe pierced at the tip in this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And then twist thread II into I and insert the probe with all of thread II into the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it pierces into the margin of the fundament inside, then withdraw the thread from that hole as you would put your finger into the fundament; and pull the head of the thread out, and bring together both ends and tie them together, leaving them for one or two days; and tighten them sometimes until the threads cut through those tissues that are between them and fall off; then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in every way that you can, unless it is too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to first cauterize deeply and then treat until healed, as we have said.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the narrow spine through which the fistula is made is sharp and cutting on one side, but not on the other because you should not cut what you should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are inside the anus like grains of resin, being small or large, and constantly discharging blood, with one or several present, or they prolapse from the anus and extend to the tip of the anus; but those that prolapse have less moisture, and often discharge a little yellow water or a little blood, having the color of flesh. The treatment for those who have hemorrhoids inside the anus is as follows: instruct the patient to strain while going to the latrine until the hemorrhoids are forced out, and then seize them with forceps; hurry and grasp them with tongs or hold them with your fingernail, then cut them at their base. If the nail cannot hold them due to moisture, take them with a cloth, cotton, or a piece of chamlet; pull them out with two fingers, then cut them, and apply warm powder like a cautery. Or you can cauterize them as mentioned in the chapter on cauteries, then treat them with other remedies until healed. If the anus cannot be emptied, administer to the patient a biting and sharp enema to wash what is inside the anus so that it can come out freely. When the patient strains and if the hemorrhoids are already prolapsed from the anus, the treatment is easier: grasp them with your fingernail or tongs, cut them, then treat them as mentioned above until healed, ensuring that there is no incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must prepare the stitching in this manner: take one thread of wool, and put it into a needle, then draw the thread upwards and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be loose; and pull the thread firmly, then tie the knot, and remove the needle, and do so for all the others, and leave one to drain excess blood. Then place a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate on the wound, and apply it, and instruct the patient to rest; and let them rest until they fall asleep, and when they have fallen asleep, then treat them with ointment and other remedies until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the cleaning of the fire or the base
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a drying out of phlegm in the intestines, and due to a constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you scrape the surface with a sharp instrument or your nail, so that it does not become moist; then shave it until it is smooth as it should be; and if it cannot be made smooth, begin scraping again more forcefully than before, until it is bare and completely scraped; then cleanse it until it is healed.
dou fremit	If there is trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	An ant is a small creature that lives within the body and goes very deep inside it. Sometimes one feels its chill, feeling like death due to trembling, which spreads throughout the body, especially affecting the hands more than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment for this is that you take a quill from an oyster feather or a strong vulture feather, and place that feather on the trembling spot so that its circle covers all around the trembling; then turn your hand along the entire feather until it completely encircles the trembling, pressing it deep inside and pulling out the trembling by its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this with a strand of brass or iron according to this shape, and let it be thin underneath and pointed above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, cauterize the trembling vein, as it is mentioned before in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the shape of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	An enema is sometimes made of silver or lead, or melted brass or iron; and sometimes these tools are made small or large according to the need.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that one uses in caring for children and those who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large enema is as follows: where the belly is bound, it is like this:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And there should be an opening where the belly is bound, as you see, and the feces inside pierced; and there should be two holes on one side and one on the other, and the belly should be placed on a beast's bladder or parchment with many small holes around it, with one inch of space between each hole. Then take a strong thread of coarse, twisted yarn and tie it in an X-shape or wrap it around, and close the belly like a goat's stomach. And when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the tool before with a strong thread, then administer the enema; this is the circular shape:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and oil or egg yolk or similar should be rubbed on the end of the clyster before it is inserted gently; then the minister squeezes with both hands until it is completely empty, then removes the clyster, and the patient lifts their legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to come out, then hold it as long as possible; and if it remains overnight undisturbed, there is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use a clyster in an illness with abdominal swelling, and the medicine rushes to come out, then begin again until it is emptied.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, then let the clyster be as thin as for a child; and this is the shape of the thin clyster tip where the skin is tightened:
des plaies	of wounds.
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and for illnesses, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made from, and according to where the wounds are made, and what they are made of.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by striking with a stone, and cutting with sword or knife, or lance or club or arrow, or similar things; or they are made according to the locations on the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or thigh, or belly, or liver, and similar members. And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and will begin with simple head wounds, for the reminder will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, then be careful if it was caused by a blow from a stone or similar things, and if the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you are uncertain about raising a hot abscess: make the bandage immediately with the cephalic membrane even if there is little bleeding from the wound, and let the bandage be on the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the patient avoid excess consumption of wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he does not want to heal, let his food be reduced,
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut and similar ones, and its lips cannot be approximated by tenting, then approximate them by suture, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone and hangs open but still has some attachment, then cut it off. Then treat the wound with medicines, replace the skin with hard tissue, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods such as beans and cooked wheat, as well as poultry and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find putrefaction in the skin but not reaching the bone, cut off all the rotted part and cauterize it with fire. Then treat the wound. And if there is an artery or vein exposed in the wound that cannot be staunched by medicines alone, ligate the artery. If you find it dislocated, tie it down with a thread. And if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy; and it is that you place into this powder that bonds before the wound has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is thus: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live chalk three parts, and grind them subtly into a powder, and apply it to the wound, binding it tightly until it absorbs well and joins with all its blood; then let it rest without loosening it, unless it swells; for do not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes live chalk alone is used when incense and dragon's blood are not available, but before the wound has moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	But if the wound has moved, especially in summer, then do not apply this powder; instead, place some digested ointments or poultices made from barley flour with water and honey until it swells; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with delicate forceps; and I will tell you about head fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head; but if the nerve of the neck or an artery is severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerve, there is no other treatment than to leave it alone and not put anything constraining on it, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retreat; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be warm, such as hot water washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cucumber washed likewise in sweet water, and other moist compresses according to this manner, and moist applications.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then sew it closed and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and full of bowels, then pierce it lower down; and if an artery is cut and blood is flowing copiously, then drain it and close it and cauterize it if necessary. And if the spine of the throat or the heart is cut, guard the passage through which the meat goes, then sew up the heart on top of the windpipe, but do not touch the throat itself; and then bind it tightly and leave it for a few days before treating it with drying ointments until it heals. And if the wound has impressed upon the bone, cut around it; and if there are pieces of bone that you can remove, remove them all, but those which you cannot have, let the wound fester until it can be drained and sewn up. And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, look if wind from the wound blows out when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it at first, nor bind it so that the blood does not flow deeply and reach the heart, killing the patient; but apply attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day. And if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so that there will be no spasm, nor harmful trembling of the heart, nor straining of the breath. And when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it then with dressings and other remedies until it is healed; and if it cannot heal or open, know immediately that there is a fistula present; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a cut made by a sword or knife and it is simple, whether on the front or back, treat the one that is ahead; if it is large, suture it; if it is small, use powder. If it is close to the bone and has cut into pieces, clean the wound, and remove any foreign bodies if they are evident; if they are not evident, let the wound fester so that extraction will be easier. The judgment for other wounds on other limbs is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Regarding rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Rupture of the belly can be large, medium, or small. In the case of a large wound, sometimes the intestines or part of them protrude through it, making stitching difficult, and sometimes a smaller wound is worse than a larger one because it is harder to replace the intestines. For this reason, it is better to close a moderate-sized wound, as moving the intestines back into place can be easier with such a wound. Know that there are four ways in which the belly can rupture: two common stitches occur in abdominal stitching, and two other stitches specific to other wounds on the body are also common; however, they are more specific to abdominal stitching, and I will discuss each one separately.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and some part of the intestines is sticking out, and it is difficult to put back, this can be done in one of two ways: either because the wound is small, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this way: soak a sponge or one cloth in just hot water, or cook in hot water with cumin and saffron and spikenard, and raise the intestines until the swelling has passed; and sometimes do this wine compress, and it is helpful to apply it with sole for swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling beginning to go down, moisten the intestines with water in which aloe and mallow have been cooked, for by this the entrance will be widened a little; and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision on the wound using the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is that you cut only if necessary, none should cut without great necessity; and this is the tool for splitting: so cut inward in the curve and do not force too much. Here is the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is widened, and the intestines jut out, then reset them according to their natural shape in their proper place if you have the power, for this is useful.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	If the wound is wide and it is below the belly, then make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head. And if it is below the belly, then place the head and breast higher than the lower parts, and likewise if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then arrange it so that the wounded part is higher than the other; and thus one must prepare this for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	If the wounds are small, apply what you have prepared, then have between your hands one skillful minister who carefully draws out all the ruptured parts with their hand and joins the lips together; this is the common method of stitching. Take several needles according to the quantity of the wound's width, then leave two spans from the head of the wound and insert a needle with good strong thread. Pierce both sides of the skin with both sides of the sinew beneath it until you pierce it on that side and join together four heads of sinew; then tighten them with a double thread around the needle on both sides, then carefully join both edges of the wound, leaving two spans, and insert another needle. Then tie the thread as you did the first needle, continuing this process according to your need for needles until the entire wound is restrained. The needles should be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, because very fine ones cut all the flesh, and very large ones cannot enter well: therefore they must be medium-sized. Do not pierce the needles too deeply into the flesh and skin so that they do not cut and open the wound before stitching. Then cut off the heads of the needles so they do not hurt the patient when sleeping, and place tents or bandages on the needle heads to hold them in place, leaving them there until the wound is healed. This method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it only requires one or two needles. The second stitching method is common: join together both sides of the skin and both sides of the sinew with one needle having a medium-strength thread; once you have pierced all four heads together, tighten the needle on that side in the manner one sews cloth, placing the thickness of a finger's span between each stitch. This stitching is known to men; I once stitched a wound on a man's belly that was over a palm wide, and it had protruded intestines about two palms long, with the wound being right in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I reset his intestines after it had been out for 24 hours. The wound was closed by the 15th day and I treated it; he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the physicians judged that he would die, but this was a miracle. I did not treat it with ointment, as there were none available nor any medicines in this place. Instead, I put old cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of sewing: Take the needle and pierce it from the outside towards the inside until it reaches the heart. Then leave the eye of the needle on the outside where you pierced it, and pierce it again from the inside out. The purpose of this stitch is to sew as a furrier sews furs, leaving the needle once on one side and then picking it up again on the other side until the sewing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, which Galen describes properly, is as follows: some people assemble the two parts naturally and apply one end of the thread to the other in this way: insert a needle into the nearby edge of one piece of skin, then pierce it only at that spot, leaving both ends of the thread; next, turn the needle and pierce it from outside going towards inside across both ends of the thread; then pierce each side from outside going towards inside through two other edges of skin that are located on the opposite side; this is the best and most common method of suturing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this word, and some attest to it: one must suture the belly with two needles, each having thread; one needle should be placed on one side, and the other on another, in the manner of those who sew hides. Know that when the wound is inside the belly, the stitching is tighter than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds. It is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood before it has moved, then reset the intestines and close the skin; then place powder made from herb on it, and if it has moved, apply some ointment present until the wound bows; and stitch the fil, and let the sinew and flesh be sound; then treat the wound like others until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, then apply old cotton immediately when it begins to bow, and stir it twice a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	But in many conditions when wounds are simple, you have no need for other medicine. And if you doubt that the wound communicates with the main limbs, then it is necessary to moisten light linen in warm oil of roses or rose oil, and place it around the angles and under the armpits; and if there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which happens often, then give black wine enema; especially if putrefaction reaches the intestines; and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines called "jejunum" cannot heal when injured due to the thinness of its veins and the delicacy of the entire body, and their proximity to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the spleen jumps out of the wound, put it back also like the intestines while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned green or black, tie the spot that is black to prevent blood flow since there are veins and arteries here; then cut what is between the ties, and hang the two ends down from below the wound until it falls out to ease extraction, and the wound will close.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some people, as I saw one man wounded in the belly by a lance; the wound was on the right side of the stomach, became funnel-shaped, and developed into a fistula through which digested food and wind escaped. I treated it according to what I knew, continually refining my approach until he healed, with the ends sewn together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him bound, I doubted that the patient had illness in his belly. But there was no harm, rather he remained in better condition, eating and drinking; some experimenters said that if there were a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound thus: Take frogs with large heads, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the frog has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it stretches open its mouth over them; then cut off its head, and this remains so that it cannot come undone, then place another frog afterward in the same manner before, until the wound is entirely covered; and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	These frogs are inserted into the intestine and no harm comes to the patient. And one can suture the intestine with a thin thread made from an animal's gut thus: Take the head of this gut thread that is well skinned, and then tie at its head a thin twisted linen thread, then put the thread through the needle, and stitch up the gut, bringing it back together; and this manner of frog sewing is not far outside the path of trust and hope. But if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is no device or health but that of subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Concerning a fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	It should be known that any wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is commonly called a 'fistula,' and especially so if it is deep and returns inward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is truly a broken and white nodule without pain, and it is also deep like the feather of a bird; sometimes it appears clear and deep, other times thick; sometimes small, other times large. I have already spoken about this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed and has no scar only becomes such due to one of nine causes: namely, either because of the thinness or quality of the blood or flesh; or because of its evil nature; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips which prevents flesh from forming; or because there is too much depth; or because the place is narrow and the matter is of poor quality; or because the medicine used in treatment was not good; or because the corruption is in the form of a pestilence; or because the property of the region is tardy in digestion, slow to heal, and naturally inflamed. I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and their treatments with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I must inform you about the treatment of fistula, which is done by manual labor.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries, nerves, or the sacrum, intestines, bladder, ribs, spine, or any joint of the hands or feet; and some even originate at the primary property of the member itself.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all fistulas of this type are difficult to treat, and require effort and skill. If there is any fistula that does not originate from the locations I mentioned, and you have confidence in its treatment and recognize it, then use an iron or brass probe if the fistula is straight, otherwise search for it with a thin lead probe, as lead bends around twisted areas. If the fistula has many openings and cannot be found by probing, then irrigate it through one of the openings, as moisture will flow from one opening to another and cleanse it. Then probe it deeply until you know whether there is bone or nerve present, and how deep it is; ask the patient about their pain when you press your hand on it, and where they feel it most strongly. Once you truly know its location and whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the locations I mentioned, then cut into it accordingly, removing the defect and corrupted flesh inside; then treat it until it is healed. If the fistula is very deep in the right place, then cut deeply into it as much as possible, then insert moistened probes dipped in acetic acid medicine up to the head of the fistula until the medicine corrodes any remaining excess tissue. Then apply healing ointments made from fresh meat until it is completely healed; if not, cauterize it as we have described. If the bone around the fistula is corrupted, then cut into it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not trouble the main limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then cleanse until all corruption is removed, then treat external wounds until it is clean; and if it is not clean, and bowels resume as before, know that you have not yet reached the bottom: so uncover and seek until you are at the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore it to its place; and if it is thus cleaned, that is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; if there is no other means than leaving it to nature. And if there are some small corrupted bones, and you can grasp them with tongs, then extract them using appropriate instruments, and if there are many bones, remove them all, leaving none behind. And if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, then cut through moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place something irritating on the wound to cause corruption, and leave it until the spot is corrupted all around the bones, and then they will come out more easily; and if it's a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh, then just wait until the corruption has completely disappeared before restoring the wound. And if there is a large portion of decay reaching to the marrow of the bone, you must cut into it all the way up to the decayed part, and then treat it until it's sound again. And I will tell you about one case of fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid from it in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause that made matter come to the leg, causing it to swell with a large abscess that did not have an apparent cause. But foolish physicians operated on him so much that they caused the abscess to open, and they corrupted many materials, making it into a fistula, and there were many holes through which bowels and moisture from the body came out; and for two years many physicians attempted cures without any skilled hand at all until I was called in, and I saw his leg and the medicines that he was being treated with, and what flowed through the holes in large quantity. And the man's body became red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of those holes, then searched all the holes, and found that one came against another from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then hurried and cut into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, which was rotted and perforated, with the corruption reaching to the bone within. I scraped away what appeared of the rotted bone, believing there was no other corruption besides that which I removed; and began to dress the wound with dissolving medicines for a long time, but it would not heal. Then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, finding that the corruption continued in the bone, which I scraped away, then removed it, and attempted to heal the place, but could not do so until I cut around about a palm's width of the bone, and drew it out entirely, then restored it with medicines. And it was soon healed and closed, and there was no need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood was often needed, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, and he had good health with no harm or injury at all, neither in air nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, it should be treated like this: take a linen cloth, and wrap it around the head of the exposed bone, and command someone to stretch it upwards; then take another thicker linen cloth than the first one, and tie it on top of the flesh that is above the bone, and pull the head so you can draw out the rotting flesh below, and uncover the flesh where you want it to be seen, so that the bone does not damage the flesh. And put a stick or a hot stone under the bone to move the rotting flesh away; and this should continue until you can see and feel the corruption, and still do it again once more.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh; then place a brand underneath, and then saw from one side to the other the corruption, and let the sawing be the length of the corruption of a span, as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, cut off the corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it contains the other part; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut; and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or foot, that is very difficult, but nevertheless you must examine this corrosion how it opens; and cleanse it in all ways that you can, but let not the vein or nerve hinder you; and know that the tools for cutting these bones are many, according to the setting of the bones and their appearance outside, and their thickness and their fineness, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare for each kind of work its proper tool; and know that your work will show you the tool that you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the tool that you need according to what is right.
dou feu	by fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	When the head of the arm becomes inflamed due to internal causes or external injuries, and although you apply medicine for this corruption with medicinal treatments but it does not benefit at all, then you must cover that limb up to the point where the corruption began so that the patient escapes death either from this corruption or from the greater harm of losing the limb; and the sign is when the limb turns black as if burned by fire, and after the blackness spreads, these corruptions travel member by member throughout the body; so hurry to cover it up, and if it is due to the bite of venomous creatures such as sea scorptions or snakes and similar ones, cover from the head of the two fingers downwards but do not let it reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, cover it at the joint so that corruption does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, cover it at the elbow; but if it passes beyond the elbow, then death is certain, and although there are powerful remedies available in large quantities, they serve no purpose; and likewise when corruption comes to the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cover it above that joint; and if it reaches the foot itself, cover the entire foot; and if it spreads up the leg, cover at the knee joint; but if it is above the knee, there is nothing left to do except let the patient die. And the method of covering or bandaging the limb is as follows: tie it above and below with cloths, extend some ministers on one side of the lower tie and others on the other side of the upper tie, then cut away the flesh between the two ties using a wide spatula until the bone is exposed; then cover it with bandages or ointments, placing linen cloths on either side so that the ointment does not touch the healthy area and cause further injury and inflammation.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the area quickly, or apply powders that stop bleeding. Then return to your treatment until it is complete. Then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage and care for it until it heals; And I will tell you what happened to a man in great distress: He developed a blackness that seemed like burnt fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his right foot, spreading until it covered the whole foot. And when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cut off his foot and was healed. But long after, the corruption came again, this time on his hand, and he came to me. After cleansing his body, I applied things that would draw out the matter, but the corrosion did not stop. He then wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do it, as I hoped to draw out the matter. But I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand he might die, for his strength was weak; And he despaired completely and returned to his land, hastening to cut off his hand, and was healed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Rarely does an abscess form in the flesh and remain so long that it collects a large amount of pus; then it becomes red and breaks open, the pus flows out, and the area remains empty like a vessel. The skin above is as thin as a delicate cloth and does not reach to the bone or nerve. Such an ailment is called 'sain' and not 'fistula'; but if it extends so deeply that it reaches the bone, it is then called 'fistula'. And the skin in this case is such that you should cut around that skin entirely, even when it is thin like a cloth.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you believe that the skin will rot and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cure it thus with a clyster: first look to see if the breast is large and the pus that flows from it has a foul odor. Then use the Egyptian medicine made like this: take equal parts of aloe, oil, and litargyros, and put them in a vessel on the fire until the medicine becomes red and thick like honey. Then take some according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and insert it into the breast, closing the opening; let the medicine remain there for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; do this many times until the breast is cleaned out and free of corruption. Sometimes a clyster of water and ashes is used when this medicine is not present, using ashes from burnt vine wood, mixing them with water, and filtering it to use as a clyster until you know that the breast is well cleaned. And if the patient cannot tolerate this, nor the Egyptian medicine or the water and ashes, then use a clyster of water and honey with a little ground litargyros; or use a mixture of honey and wine, choosing honey with properties to cleanse and wash, and wine that makes the flesh harden. And when you have done this and believe that the breast is well cleansed, then use a clyster that promotes flesh growth using diachylon plaster mixed with rose oil and wine; or use other medicines and ointments whose properties I have discussed in the treatise on ointments. And if the opening of the breast is small and the tube of the clyster cannot enter, then widen it slightly with an iron tip and insert a wick of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened; and if the wound is too large, then close it except for the place where the clyster can enter. And if the opening that discharges pus is above, then cut below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the bowel is deeply prolapsed, do not allow any flesh to enter; and if you cannot grasp it below as you wish, arrange it in such a way that the bowel reaches its lowest point, for when the bowel is deep, no flesh should be allowed to enter. If you cannot grasp the bowel below as you see fit, arrange it so that it falls easily downward, leaving nothing of the bowel. Then take consolidating medicines to place on the skin, and spread them evenly on the linen cloth covering all the skin. Then cut into the breastbone a little larger than the first opening, for then spread soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the opening, and put it on the opening of the bowel to alleviate its prolapse. Do not remove the outer cloth but once after many days; and that which is on the opening of the breastbone, remove it often to remove the bowel, and note what comes from the bowel, whether it is venom or little or much, or digested, or undigested. Take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and if there is an abscess or not. When your medicine has been applied in this manner and you see that it flows onto the opening of the bowel, then know that the breast has already healed, and the soundness approaches. Then untie it in the morning or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other cloth and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast swells with indigestion after many days, know that the breast is not improving.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle veins break open after a long time, do not despair of health, for recovery approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	And there are men whose flesh grows late in healing their wounds, and those who heal quickly. And if the breast swells with indigestion after many days, know that the breast is not improving. And if the breast heals slowly, and is far away, apply drying medicines to it, such as diaphoretic ointment, which contains much vitriol, and this is the last medicine. Take diaphoretic ointment and make it with rose oil and an equal amount of old wine; then cook it and use it. And if diaphoretic ointment is not present, do the same with honey increased in size, when you take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, and mix them with the honey while it is on the fire. Then dip a cloth in it and apply it to the breast, sometimes administering aristolochia longa and celestine roots, which are also like wheat and centaury flour. Use simples or composites: grind them and make powder, put it on the honey I mentioned earlier, and use it. And if the cure is prolonged and not cured by this cure, know that the corruption has gone deep and has affected the bone or hard member or ligaments. Then treat the fistule as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the nail's abscess
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Nail abscess is an infection that occurs under the nail of the thumb or big toe, or sometimes in other toes. If it is neglected and grows old, a black and swollen bump will appear, which may spread and consume the entire root of the nail, even reaching the bone, causing foul-smelling pain. The affected area becomes enlarged and has a yellow color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If the treatment does not work as we have described it and the cure is of no benefit, then you must cut off with iron all the excess that remains of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cauterization is very helpful if the bone and nail are healthy. If the nail presses against the flesh and begins to prick and fester, then you must insert a hot iron under the nail where it touches the flesh, hold it in place and carefully cut away that part of the flesh with scissors or knife. Then apply burning and corrosive medicines to completely remove it. Afterwards, dress the wound with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it off and draw out fire, for as long as the corrupted bone remains there, it cannot heal; and if you see both being corrupted, cut one of them at once as it is said before, then treat it until it heals; and if it is reddened and swollen, causing great pain, you must heal it first. Then cut the claw of the spina of the shoulder diagonally from above, making sure that the blade does not reach the flesh beneath the claw, for the patient would feel too much pain. And if this happens, place something on it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	Pain in the elbow of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Some people's elbows are sometimes entirely fleshy and sometimes have bone spurs, and occasionally there is a claw, some of which grow at the root of the joint where their origin is in certain bones.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born with a knot on the neck does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the neck sometimes moves; the girth of one who is fleshy is light, thus: cut him at his root with a broad scalpel.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born from the root of the joint is difficult to treat: thus hold the cupper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one who is born with a knot on the back of his neck, it is necessary that you first circumcise the flesh roundly to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable saw, then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swelling that comes on both cheeks together comes from birth, or from the closing of a wound, or from burning with fire, or from similar causes.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Therefore you must cut away that swelling so that the cheeks regain their natural shape. Then place between them two damp cloths moistened in rose oil to prevent swelling, or place between them two thin pieces of lead until the area is healed as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If at any time one of his hands swells with inflammation, then cut that swelling as it is necessary.
des vils	Of the evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large, enveloping vessels full of melancholic excesses that come to many parts of the body; and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you must administer him a purge for bile, and then wash him with holy water.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is done in two ways: one is that you cut them and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you raise the vein and draw it entirely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting is done in this manner: first raise the leg with hot water very strong until the thick blood becomes subtilized, then hold the leg of the patient down from above the hip joint to below the knee; then cut the vein at one or two or three places, with a wide cut, then lift and draw out the black blood by hand from one end to the other until as much blood comes out as the virtue of the patient can withstand; and then tie it up, and command him to abstain from eating black bile; and recommence the evacuation and washing when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The elevation of the leg is done in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, especially if there is much hair, then place it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red and the veins swell; and if you have no bath, heat it by the fire, then cut near the vein where the long hairs are at the top of the knee, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin with an awl, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears when touched; and it looks red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord; then place the probe underneath until it lifts the vein out of the skin, and then tie it to one ligature gently, then cut three fingers away on another place; then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with the probe as you have done before, and tie it to another ligature in the same way; then make another incision if necessary, then lift and cut at the two ends of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second incision; then extract it inch by inch until it comes out entirely, then cut it; and if you cannot pull and lift it, take a needle with strong double thread, tie it and pull it, and place it under the probe, turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; and be careful that it does not cut, for if it cuts, it cannot be pulled or lifted, and harm comes to the patient; and when you have extracted it entirely, then place moist wool in wine and rose oil on the wound, and dress it until it is clean.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cut through it completely; and draw it out as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron tool with which one cuts the vein is curved and does not cut through it so as to open the vein; and it should be thickly curved for if it were too fine it would open the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the veins in general.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein enters the legs, in warm regions where no herbs or trees grow and where there is no moisture; and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, which happens due to putrefaction that comes under the skin, like how a serpent or worm enters inside the body, appearing between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a very great inflammation comes upon the leg, then the location changes and the vein begins to protrude forth like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, you must wrap around a piece of lead from one and a half to two inches long, fold it and tie it around the leg. Every time it points outwards, wrap the lead again and retie it. If it's too long, cut off a part, wrap the remainder and do not cut at its root, lest it enters the flesh and causes an abscess and decay in that place, leading to bad illness. For this reason, it must be treated bit by bit until it reaches its head, leaving nothing on the body. Sometimes this vein can be as long as five or ten palms; I once saw a man whose was ten palms long. When you cut it, insert one reed into the hole and pierce it to the bottom so that all of it comes out. Empty the matter inside and apply healing ointments to prevent decay for several days before treating it like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it opens at the ankle joint or on the foot, where there are many perforations and it often bleeds; therefore treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This illness is called in our land 'cattle disease', because it often occurs in cattle, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body ascending and descending, and can be felt well as it moves from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it goes out, and leaves sores; and it is harmful due to corruption of some humors, like those that come from worms, serpents, leeches, and roundworms in the belly; and its malice is doubted, because when it goes through the body and reaches the head, it sometimes enters the eye and destroys it. This happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see one to cure and draw out, then it can only be done when it moves. Therefore, you must tie the area above and below with a strong, tight cord. Then cut into it and pull out the worm. If the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies. The greatest harm it causes is that it may run into the eye, as we have said. And if you see it coming near the eye or its head, press down firmly on the eyebrow below it, then cut into it and pull out the worm. The patient should also use bodily cleansing medications to dissolve harmful humors in the body, and avoid eating rotten foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called in our land "wakyr", and is a pain that comes into certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb. I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and soon after, I saw something move like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, like quicksilver when it moves from one place to another; the pain departed from that spot, and fixed itself in the shoulder, and then a little later spread throughout the body, so much so that she came to have it in the other arm; then she told me that she was constantly turning around the body, as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how she could move like this from limb to limb, for I had never seen such a disease behave in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I had heard many times that pain could indeed move from one place to another, but I had not seen it happen as clearly as I saw it in this woman; and I thought that this was because the woman had a thin body, with veins visible on the surface, and therefore this condition appeared more constrained; but those who are dislocated do not experience this reasonfully, for they have moist bodies and hidden veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this illness, and the patient feels that pain which we have described, then place a hot poultice above and below quickly, and then cut until that constrained wind is expelled from its place; cauterize the area; and if you cannot see it with your eyes, then treat it with those remedies that expel winds, such as fetid pills, pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows vary according to their shapes and the parts of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variations in their shape are such that there are those which have large points and small ones, barbed and welded; and those which have two angles, those with long shafts, and those with split ends. And those which strike any limb strike it in one of two ways: either at the start of the limb, like the head, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs, or along its length.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls then in any place of these limbs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you hereafter, appear to you: so it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for many die afterwards in various ways; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of death when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and the scalp wound that is on the head becomes red, is when there is darkness before the eyes, swelling and straining and redness within them, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and mixing of the senses, vomiting of bile; and perhaps there will be without wound of the nostrils, or of the ears; and perhaps he loses his speech and voice; and from the wound flows white moisture like pigeon's milk, and also burned flesh comes out; and if this sign appears to you, then take care of the cure, and draw out the arrow if it is not deeply embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of an arrow wound when it hits the heart are that it is near the left nipple and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; sometimes the arrow moves like a bird's pulse, and black blood flows out, and chilliness and cold sweat come on, and fainting: then know for certain that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow wound in the lung is that foam comes out of the wound without pain, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow strikes the covering of the lung, it is near the ribs; and causes great shortness of breath and pain, and sighing; and all the shoulder members move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach, sometimes some undigested flesh may spout from the wound
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow strikes the belly and no excrement comes out through the intestines, there is no hope for recovery or extraction of the arrow
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow falls into the bladder, and urine jumps out and blood comes forth, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and auxiliary parts and spine of the back and hip and thigh and similar limbs, are saved according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you that happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened at the house of one that an arrow fell into his ear in the root of the nose; I probed it and drew it out on the other side under the fat of the ear without injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And once I drew out an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye under the eyelid, and the arrow was bent back, and could only reach the tip facing the wood, and it was a large Turkish bow, all iron without ears; the eye was healed and no bad accident happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And he extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arab-style arrow with ears; I grasped its feathers and pulled gently until I extracted it, and the Christian was freed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And he extracted an arrow from the belly of a man who had fallen there and thought he would die. But after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change. He cut into the arrow, twisted it, and pulled it out forcefully; there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man into whose back an arrow has fallen and the wound has healed over it; and the arrow remains inside him and does not change his natural condition nor cause harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And saw another man into whom an arrow fell on his face, and the wound healed over it. He remained thus without suffering great pain, and there were many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And he extracted an arrow from the eye of one of the king's servants which had fallen there three days prior, and it was slightly inclined towards the right side. I was summoned to treat it afterwards.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If you find the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I touched it with great care, and felt nothing; yet he felt pain and discomfort beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I applied to the wound an attractive and digestive plaster so that the wound would not swell up; then appeared the point of the arrow
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the plaster daily until the wound healed again. Then the patient remained like that for a long time until he felt the arrowhead one day near his neck; and he told me so
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound daily until it opened and I felt the head of the arrow which was stuck in place. Then I inserted the medicine into the opening of the wound with this medicine until the head of the arrow became clearly visible; and it took about four months for the inflammation to reduce so that I could insert the forceps into the wound, but the head could not be removed by pulling it from side to side. Therefore, I continued to use various tools carefully and skillfully, until one day I managed to grasp the arrowhead with well-made forceps according to its shape, as described at the end of this chapter; then I pulled it out and healed the wound
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient became entirely healthy.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	And I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your care on what I did not say, for books cannot cover everything; but wise masters compare even small things, and find new work and new instruments based on what is present and lacking, descending upon strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows leave the limbs where they are stuck in two ways: either through the opening where they entered or through another part; and those which exit through the same place where they entered are called 'entrant' arrows, and sometimes they exit now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not exit now, leave it until the flesh around it rots and the wound heals; likewise, if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for some days, moving it each day; then it will come out. If it does not, carefully cut around it with a scalpel until the surrounding area is enlarged, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I mentioned appear to the patient: then do not pull it out but let it remain there for a few days, because if the arrow comes this far, death follows.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is only stuck in the bone and does not go this far, and the patient remains for some days without bad accidents, then prepare to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck very deeply like this and cannot be removed without further injury, then administer around the area tarares as I have told you; then heal the wound until it is clean.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged in its place within the body so that it cannot be seen, search for it throughout the entire area; and if you can feel it, pull it out with some suitable instrument. And if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves or veins involved, then open the wound wider until it is large enough; and pull out the arrow if you can. And if there are barbs on the arrow to which it holds, cut away the flesh that has pierced both parts as much as you can, and then break off or bend the barbs of the arrow so that you can pull it out carefully, making sure not to break the arrowhead lest you cause greater injury.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, lay it until the place around is opened up, then draw it out, for extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood opposes you, follow what we have said about its treatment in this chapter; and beware of cutting into nerve or vein, and devise how you can gently remove the arrow without danger, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently. And place the patient as they were when the arrow struck them, for that is the greatest help, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	An arrow that comes from another side, where something of it is visible or the skin is swollen there, cut open until you can grasp it with forceps, and then extract it; now it should come out easily.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand around until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out completely; and if the shaft of the arrow is there, remove it from the bone entirely; and if the bone breaks, and you see administration necessary, then administer the instrument carefully, so that the point of the arrow enters the socket of the instrument; and then force it out, and if the arrowhead is buried, push the instrument in with the point entering first, to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrowhead is touched [embedded], then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can; then treat the wound as it ought to be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls into the thigh or belly or bladder or side and is nearby, and you can cut onto it, then do so; but be careful not to cut into the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound if necessary; and care for it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows is like a bird's beak, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form of the arrowhead is also like the feathers of a bird, to be placed at the tip of the arrow, as here is its form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the forceps for pushing and pulling out is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Of the veins from which blood is drawn there are 31, of which there are 16 at the head: namely, two temple veins that are behind the ears, called the two "herbich"; and two temporal arteries that are on the forehead; and two veins in the corners of the eyes, called "aspirations"; and one vein in the brow ridge; and one vein at the root of the nose; and two jugular veins in the neck; and two veins above the lips of the mouth, which are called "augulich"; and two veins under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	Veins commonly spoken of are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, located on the right side and called by laymen 'vein of the head'; the median is named 'fossa', composed of the cephalic and basilica, and called by laymen 'vein of the heart'; the basilica is on the left side and called by laymen 'vein of the belly', located above the elbow and is the one from which we bleed openly, apparent on the forearm.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The savatelle is the vein between the little finger and ring finger, with two branches; in the leg and foot there are three veins: one under the arch of the left calf, the second called 'saphena', located at the ankle on the right side; and the vein named 'nesse', found in the ankle of the other side. And in the other leg there are three more beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The veins behind the ears, if they are tied up with old bandages and made to bleed, are of such a quality that you should raise the patient's head and rub where the veins are with a rough cloth. Then have the patient strain their neck with a vise so that both veins appear behind the ears in two places at the back of the head: feel for them with your fingers, and where you feel the pulse underneath, pinch with your thumb; then take the lancet and insert it under the vein until it reaches the bone, then lift your hand up along the entire vein and cut into both layers of skin so that blood flows out freely. Then bind and tie it tight until it stops bleeding; I have already spoken about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries located in the temples is useful for treating old migraines, dizziness, and customary eyestrain, as well as watery eye conditions. The quality of this bleeding is as follows: have the patient strain their neck so that both veins appear clearly; feel for the pulse underneath with your fingers and pinch with your thumb; then lift the heart upwards onto the vein with your index finger, insert the lancet underneath, raise the vein up and cut it as you did with the other two veins. Let blood flow according to what is necessary; then release the patient, place your hand on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton; finally, bind it tightly and let it remain until it stops bleeding; we have already spoken about their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	For the vein of the forehead's bloodletting is as beneficial as the cephalic in treating old facial illnesses, migraines, and redness; its qualities are such that the patient strains their neck by twisting until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "fossor", of which here is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point upon the vein and strike with your hand or something else, allowing blood to flow according to what you see fit. Then release the patient's neck and bind the vein until it ceases flowing and sometimes use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, do not allow the flame to be too strong; and cut the vein diagonally, as the bone is near by, and occasionally the thin flame may break.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bloodletting of the two veins located in the arms aids the eyes, and helps with headaches, redness, and inflammation in the eye, as well as facial illnesses. And the qualities of their bloodletting are such that the patient strains their neck by twisting slightly, as before; then cut the vein diagonally, somewhat long and somewhat wide, for there is no flesh present.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they may break; then make it flow with blood, until you have enough, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The cauterization of the nose is useful for ague, and for sudden madness, and for facial illnesses, such as migraines and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is chronic. The qualities of this cautery are: the patient stretches their neck, then holds their nose with your left hand, and takes a long, subtle flame, and places it between the two nostrils in the space where the veins do not open well, and blood will now begin to flow; do not go too deep, and let blood according to your need, then bind it for one night, as it heals quickly.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The cautery of the two temples helps with straining the eye, and the beginning of measles, and many illnesses, such as impetigo and corrosion, and herpes, and swelling. The qualities of this cautery are: the patient stretches their neck on both sides, as we have said; then the master stands on the head of the patient, who sits on a chair, then opens the vein slightly for a short distance, then let blood moderately, or as much as necessary; then do the same on the other vein, then untie the bandage, and hold the veins gently so that the patient does not choke. Leave it until morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the healing of limbs
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The healing of the veins in the lips aids in cooling the mouth, and prevents gum decay, lip cracks, and swellings around them.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the manner of performing this healing is as follows: Have the patient sit before you and constrain their neck as I have described; then turn up the lip, and look for the two veins, one on the right lip and one on the left, which can be recognized by their black color and the small black veins around them. Therefore, cut both of them, but if you do not recognize them or are uncertain, then cut the largest from each side, and also perform this operation on the two veins that are above and below them, for it is done in the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the healing beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The healing of the veins that are beneath the tongue aids after the healing of the cephalic vein, and is used for narrowing the throat, and treating diseases of the eye and mouth. The manner of performing this healing is as follows: Have the patient sit between your hands before the sun, and have them lift their tongue, and look beneath each side for a black vein; then heal both of them, but do not cut too deeply, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the arm from which blood is commonly drawn are opened in two ways: either by pricking with a wide-bladed lancet or with an olive-shaped blade, sharp like a knife, and called "lancet"; and they are large and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the mirror-like blade is very well-known, and it is wide as you can see
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to use the olive-shaped blade for opening the veins of the head that are full of thick, visible blood, and contain thick and turbid blood
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more finely pointed, and is used for opening fine veins where the blood is clear and yellow.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The bloodletting from the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps those who are ill in the area below the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen; and it is necessary for the phlebotomist to bleed carefully and to beware of the artery that is beneath it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he touches the artery and bleeding begins, then it must be staunched as I said; but the flame should not be scorching, but cutting like a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilisk does not open visibly, then you must remove it and replace with another one; or you want some vein from it, or you cauterize in place of it the vein within the arm: it opens visibly; and touch the flame gently, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the place for cauterization, first tie up the arm so that you may recognize the pulse; then mark the spot with a hot coal, and then untie the arm, and cut the vein with the flame gently; but be careful not to strike the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see something like urine issuing out high up, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: hasten then, and press your finger over the wound for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which happens often; if the bleeding does not stop, tie up the arm, and leave it thus, and do not let the patient move it; and be cautious, and do not let him move until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stanched, and it conquers you, and there are no physicians present, then cut the artery if it is open, for its head withdraws; and stop the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a fig bark, cut it open, and take one half of it and tie it well until the next day. If the blood is stanched, that's good; if not, then heal it as we have said with powders that stanch blood. And these cauterizations do not harm in many cases due to the small size of the wound, nor does the power of the bandage on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The sinew of the vein in its middle helps to draw blood from above and below it because it is composed of basilica and cephalic veins as we have said. And the surgeon must beware for the nerve underneath, and if it is pricked too deeply and the nerve swells, then the sinew may be injured and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve opens very often, but in some men it does not open due to its subtlety, so you must bind it with an absorbent bandage before you touch the nerve according to your ability.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the temporal artery helps by drawing blood from the head and aids in sight; it is necessary to ligate it at its olive branch or mirror branch because this is the safest of all veins as it has neither nerve nor artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, it is necessary to find the easiest place and not worry if one fails at first, and start again; sometimes the place may swell in some people when they fail at first, but it causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the ligature depends on your skill.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about ligating is that a ligature is not done except to preserve health and prevent future illnesses; and it should be performed on one of the three veins found in the neck: the temporal, facial, and basilic veins. It should be done at the beginning of Lent, in autumn, and in winter after meals when signs ofpletion appear. It should be done on the first or third day after two or three hours into the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The leech administered to the sick has no fixed time, but when needed by day or night in all hours and at all times; nor should children be bled until they are fourteen years old, nor women pregnant except from the fourth month until seven.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Nor should those who have passed sixty years not be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner it may be, they should first cleanse the intestines with a light enema if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful impurities from the intestines into the principal members; nor should one bleed those who are too full of food or drunk, until they have sobered up, nor dropsical persons. And it is not proper to bleed after colic pains, vomiting, diarrhea, women's monthly flow, hard labor, watching, fasting, nor those entirely debilitated, either by injury or illness. Then subtly thin the humors with food and drink and medicines, if you have the skill; then enter a bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtilize the blood, and bleed from the vein on the left side around the third rib, as we have said; and that day avoid hard work, overeating, lust, and similar things. Be happy and cheerful, and let the bleeder be taller than the one being bled, and rub the arm twice or thrice, then pinch the flesh in the middle, for if it is too tight or thin, the blood cannot flow correctly; then moisten the blade with a little old oil, then place the thumb of the left hand on that vein below the rib where you wish to bleed, so that the vein does not split or fail at the strike.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flee like strings to the sinew, and some such are full of emptiness so that when one applies a flame, it retreats from the flame and cannot open the vein, and similarly many of these; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, therefore the surgeon must be discerning in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens on the first try, that's good; but if not, then begin again a little lower or higher suddenly, if the place is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the place is swollen, and the patient is afraid, let him rest one or two days, and do not bind the arm: perhaps an ulcer will form there; nor should he enter a bath, then begin cutting again if it pleases him; and if the hole is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it is not flowing as much blood as you see, then strike with the fire directly into that hole itself; and open it suddenly before the place becomes swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the vein swollen, do not recommence the cutting, and put a little bit of oil ointment on it, for it lightens the body's blood and the oil has power in this place; and thus administer the oil ointment in each cut vein to stanch the flow of blood; and this same does troche and bowstring of sinew when it is placed on the spot; so subtlely does blood move and spread when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess comes up which happens many times, especially when it is not cut before except at the time when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put on the spot an sponge moistened in water and heated somewhat, and hold it there for an hour; and you must do this after the flow of blood from the vein has stopped, and if it remains at the spot afterwards for some days with some blackness or greenness, then do not harm it; and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh dissolved in juice of calamint, mastich, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there appears an abscess and swelling at the base of the spine; therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the spot soft to the touch of the hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then do not place upon it any of the things that we have mentioned, for perhaps there is an ulcer without exit from the artery. But make a dry plaster to harden the spot, then treat with other remedies until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And take from each person blood according to its quantity and color.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red. And if you see it thick, let it become thinner. And if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And one who is full and robust and needs bloodletting should be given a larger wound and have wide-flared flames. But one who is weak should be treated conversely: they should be bled gently and often, cutting across rather than puncturing; this method of bleeding prevents excessive blood loss and damage to nerves, and is better than long or deep cuts.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	**And for one whose body fails at digestion, they should give soft bread in the juice of pomegranates; if heated, let them bleed three or four times. And if cold by nature, let them eat before digestion soft bread in musk syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.**
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	**And if he loses his digestion after much bloodletting, then it is necessary that he inhale broth of meat, and subtle fragrant syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of vein.**
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	**And if he wishes to evacuate some bile and digest another time, then when weakened by much digestion, let him digest little by little, according to the quantity of his continuous strength.**
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	**And whoever wishes to evacuate some bile after the first digestion, and has a strong body, let him digest seven hours after the first digestion, or after the ninth hour.**
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to wash on another day, they must wash on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	And since there is much blood inside the body that has already heated up and causes fever; thus it is necessary to draw out a large quantity of it, and widen the hole until it resembles a coin; then, when you have prepared all the conditions for washing, place your hand on the pulse while he washes, so that no blood comes in place of water, which happens often if the washer is negligent. But do not press strongly if you want to loosen the arm and make blood come out a second time, especially when the hole is closed; nor should one stretch out the arm hastily if it is curved, for this would be harmful; but let him wash until the second washing is done; or else prick with the tip of the flame until the frozen blood comes out through the vein's hole; then place a bit of wool dipped in water on it and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not squeeze it until the abscess quiets.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it becomes necessary to draw blood a second time, then do so in that same vein or another vein or the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein within the arm is used instead of the vein near the head because it is more convenient.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of bloodletting is thus: the patient immerses their hand in warm water until the veins appear red. Then tie it loosely so that the vein appears well. Now draw blood perpendicularly, not wide nor long; and make the puncture large. Draw blood close to the joint of the hand. If no blood comes out, immerse the hand again in warm water, allowing the blood to flow into the water until you have enough. But if it is summer time, do not immerse the hand again in warm water, for bloodletting is done more often in winter than in summer. The vein of the arm is safer to draw from than any other veins because there are no arteries nor nerves present.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve for the salvation of the right hand is beneficial for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it should be applied: constrain the hand, and immerse in warm water until the vein swells so that it can be seen; and if the vein is crossed, and if you cut it entirely across, it will not cause any harm; and do not go too deep, for the nerves lie beneath all bare of flesh, and then place the hand back into warm water if the blood is congealed in the wound so that it can exit.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And once you have removed as much blood as is necessary, then place oil and a wick on the vein to quickly cauterize it, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The salve for the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and perform all as I have told you concerning the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve for the sophena is beneficial for all diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the womb, retention of menses, and diseases of the kidneys, thighs, and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its heating is that the patient places their foot in warm water, and rubs on the vein until it reddens, and ties above the ankle joint; and the vein is at the ankle, and many veins go from there up the leg; therefore heal where the largest vein or at the ankle, which matters more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the leg, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and cut across like when cutting meat; and let the flame be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if blood cannot come out, then place the foot back in the water, and allow the vein to empty well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the veinisser fails the first time, then begin again a little higher up, for the place is stained; do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and do likewise to the sinew of the other leg evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The place of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle, and its healing is useful for hot hip pain.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of this healing is that when the patient enters into the bath and presses down on the ankle with four fingers in twisting, otherwise the vein will not open. And if it opens, then let the blood flow in all ways you can, and across. It is better to wipe it away, for the place is dry and the blood flows copiously from many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then let some blood flow from one of those veins that opens at the back of the foot, near the little toe, and beware of nerves. And drain as much blood as you can see, then untie the bandage and put cotton on it and bind it; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of bloodletting by cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or clay, or glass. And cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping without striking is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire. And cupping that is done by striking and drawing blood is performed on fourteen parts of the body, namely one at the top of the head; another on the neck; two on both sides of the neck; one under the chin; two on the shoulders; two on the buttocks; two on the arms; two on the legs; and two on the ankles. This cupping does not draw much blood but only from small veins scattered throughout the flesh, so it does not weaken the body as much as bloodletting from a vein. It is not necessary to administer it with or without fire in any disease caused bypletion, unless the whole body needs to be emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary to ventose due to illness or habit, we will bleed them each hour at the beginning or end of the month, and also in between and at all times; for there are those who, when they need to ventose, have a heavy head. And there are those who findpletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes. And there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have an swollen tongue, and vomit blood. And there are those who dream, and see by their blood, wounds and dead people and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially if it is mid-month, we tell them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bloodletting of the temple helps with headaches ... that come to the eyes, and it is not necessary for this to be done after evacuating the whole body; this bloodletting is in place of cephalic bloodletting, and those who are of cold complexion or have dizziness should not use it, as it does great harm to them. And so elders and those with cold-headed illnesses should not use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are often cured thereby become forgetful; therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower out of fear of relapse.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Cupping at the neck is beneficial for treating ailments of the head and stomach, as well as for constipation, colic, andpletion. However, it must be applied carefully, as too strong a hold can cause relapse in the stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Cupping on the second ribs of the neck is beneficial for headaches, ophthalmia, migraine, constriction, and toothache. It also aids in treating stomach ailments; however, instruct the practitioner to press gently when applying it, so as not to damage the artery or cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	Cupping under the chin is beneficial for mouth diseases, gingivitis, and similar conditions affecting the mouth. It also aids in treating cracked lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Wind-evil of the shoulders helps against an illness that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventosation of the ribs is as useful as three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and command the surgeon not to dig too deeply, for the spot is bare of flesh, and lies beneath nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass placed on the buttock is useful for hemorrhoids of the fundament and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the cupping glass be large and made of brass so that it can draw well; but if it were delicate, it might break, causing large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping glasses on the legs draw openly because they attract blood from the whole body and are useful for old pains in the loins, sciatica, and bladder problems, and improve circulation; they are placed on two thighs and two ankles, but they also weaken the body after prolonged use and cause dizziness in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping glass is as follows: first place it empty, and suck temperately, and put it on quickly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see where it becomes red and swollen, and appear the redness of blood; then stop, and remove the cups, and be careful in the positioning of the body, for there are many who have thick flesh and clear pores: thus one should strike only once, and make large wounds, but not too deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, then one must strike twice: the first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very dense, then one must strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out blood little by little, it suffices to do so once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we desire much blood, then we recommence often; and if the blood is dense, strike deeply, and the end will be when the heart pierces suddenly. And it behooves those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the places of the cups with refining and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, with violet oil or sweet almond oil or cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, with watercress oil or lily oil or camomile oil, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take oil of almonds, or of balsamite, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one's skin is tender and has large pores, no oil should be applied, but it should be washed after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porcellain, or other similar ones.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have too much moisture should rise from bed with myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large excesses should rise from old wine, or water of succory, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar ones; and they should not be cupped before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath one or two hours later; and they should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he wash himself when he must be cupped and when he is cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware those who are excessively choleric, and whose blood is too hot and inflamed; they should take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces with vinegar, and similar foods; and eat pigeons and castrated hare meat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion should take syrup of honey and medium-scented wine, which is between old and new, and eat peacock meat, pigeons, small birds, and chickens; and on the day they expect to have wind, they should drink more than eat; and some men should sometimes be given treacle or muscat before the ventosication, or afterwards, to strengthen the main members; and let the blood be subtilized, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cups that are placed without cauterizing are those placed on the liver and on the kidneys, and on podagry, and on the stomach, abdomen, back, and buttocks, for these limbs cannot withstand cauterization and it is only done to draw blood from limb to limb, as we place them on the breasts when there is inflammation; to remove viscosity from the limb, as we place cups on the stomach and abdomen to reduce the limb; and it relieves pain where there is oppression or stone, perhaps by its attractive power drawing off the oppression or moving the stone from its place; and similarly it acts when placed on the liver and kidneys when there is retained wind, and these cups are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in this manner one fills the cup with warm water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping glass administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two mouths of half a palm's width and depth, with a small hole on each side around the middle, like that for inserting a needle, and they are made of brass, smooth in front so they do not cut the patient when placed on the limb; and there is a transverse bar of brass or iron in the middle to hold a wick candle, and there should be both large and small ones according to the diseases and the size of those who use them; for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of old people, and those of thin people differ from those of fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this cupping glass on the limb thus: light the candle wick made of wax or linen, and insert it into the glass through the transverse bar inside the glass so that the flame is at the bottom of the glass and does not burn the patient; then place the glass on the limb with both mouths over the holes we mentioned earlier, so that when you wish, the steam can escape, and remove the glass; and take the wick as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping procedure used for the disease of pleurisy with acute fever, it has neither tube nor hole, and is not filled with fire unless it is full of air, and is placed only on the member; this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without heat, cupping is used only in members where one cannot place cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; also in fleshless locations, like the toes or nails, and other similar ones. The quality of the user is that when you find leeches that are in clear, sweet waters without any injury, take them; put them for a night in sweet water until they become accustomed, having nothing in their bellies; then clean the vein and the cup, then rub the member until it becomes red, and place the leeches on top. And when they become full and fall off, if it is a location where one can place a cupping glass, place one there, for this is very beneficial afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this is not so, then lift the joint gently, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the joint bleeds too much after the body of the wound, wet a linen cloth in cold water and put it on until the bleeding stops; and if the blood increases, put ground vitriol or salt, etc., until it stops flowing; or you put half a handful of peeled beans on the joint and let them sit until they swell at the joint, now it will stop flowing; and if you need more of this, take other wounds.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds will not take, then rub fresh blood on the joint, or stick a needle in it until the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will swell; and when you see that they are full, sprinkle some powder of aloe and bulrushes crushed together, or ashes, now they will stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know this, dear son, that foolish physicians neglect this chapter because they have never seen any of the ancient books or letters about it. Because of this, medical knowledge is lacking in our land, for I found no good practitioners here; and I know nothing except through the knowledge gained from the ancient books which I have studied so much that I have practiced medicine through experiment and practice. In this chapter, I have described what is contained therein and summarized it at the end, clearly showing the forms of instruments that are required, as I did in the two chapters preceding this one.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the essence of the words and chapters where the wise man focuses his attention and remains on the truth, so that those who are proven may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or concussion comes upon any individual, then you must hasten to heat the patient on both sides if nothing prevents you from doing so entirely, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; unless the time is very hot or too cold; and avoid cold foods, that is to say cold drinks, and bird meat and venison, and do not drink wine nor eat any fatty meats, nor fill oneself too full with foods that fill the veins with blood until you doubt a hot abscess or an expansion of matter in the limb. Then return the patient to his first government which he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, then you must nourish the patient with foods that promote growth and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pears, pancakes of veal, eggs, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at such nourishment movement repeats quickly, often breaking bones.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the old and feeble do not heal well nor unite according to their nature due to weakness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children; but there is no treatment, reset on the broken bone large splints which support and join the limb together until it becomes strong again; and do not shorten any part of its work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish them with rich foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that breaks are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the head is different from the break of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of breaking.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that go upwards, and others that pierce, like cutting a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if fracture with wound, and fracture is through a small fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each manner has its own device, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to how the memory comes back into its place; and bone fracture is known by the twisted place, and is evident by lack of sound, and heard when pressed with the hand; but if there is no twisting or sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture; but it may well have twisting, or fissure, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	So you should not move it with your hand, but put on medicines that follow below, and then gently hold it in place.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that fractures which go into the air are those where the two parts are disjoined; you must bring them together evenly so that no inflammation comes; and if inflammation does come, let it be for some days until it is appeased; then set the bone in its proper place gently and smoothly, knowing that the restoration of this one will be easier than those with pieces; then hold it as described below.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken in pieces, then splint it with two parts, if it's a hand or foot, or with your hand if it's a small member, or with two ropes, or one rope and your hand; And place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are aligned, you straighten it with all your strength, and ensure that through your work no injury nor pain comes to the patient; And join the two ends of the bones together in the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if it seems not to be right; Then straighten it nicely, and do not pull too hard, nor press so that by your work heat and stiffness come to the limb, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is set, instruct the patient well that he not move it, neither in waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor any other way; And ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	When he feels any pain, it is not yet complete, and you must put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and make sure that he is properly placed so that there are no twists when he is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are as I told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs differ in smallness, size, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	But there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and the like: they should be wrapped in soft, thin linen cloths; and those that are large, such as thighs and calves, should be wrapped in a wide, hard bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the entire large limb and squeeze it evenly from all sides so there is no gap; then tie it around with light pads, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand somewhat on the whole bandage, then go up above the break and tighten less so that the break can open a little; and soften the bandage bit by bit until you grasp most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap it again around the broken area; then return to the part below the break and tighten moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first binding above; then put pads of linen or cloth between the bandages so that they are all even, then tie everything up with a sling, and then place your well-made splints on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then apply a warm compress to soothe the abscess and reduce the swelling, leaving it on for several days; then tie it tightly with bandages made of half of a thick cane split lengthwise, or wood from which wedges are made, or palm fronds, shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the bandage that is placed on the fracture must be a little thicker and wider than the others; it should also be as long as necessary for the limb's size or length. Then tie it tightly over the bandages, just as you did on the first layer of the break; tie again evenly, but not too tight nor too loose; and the thread should be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen. For if the threads are thick, like those foolish people who make their bandages from twisted hemp ropes, it is a great mistake; for the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two fingers' width between each layer.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the edges of stones after the extraction in clean places, then place underneath them linseed poultices, or woolen bandages, so that it does not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with breaking and the bone is broken, I will speak of its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that one should not extract all stones from the limbs broken on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, one should not insert stones before five or seven days, or more according to the certainty of an abscess happening; and here is the manner of ancient plasters for restoring breakage, dislocation, and torsion: Take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg whites, and make this mixture neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common manner of the plaster restoring breakage in many ways, and especially for women and young children, as it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method for plaster restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: take storax and ladanum and mallow and asafetida and gum arabic and nard, each three drachms; myrrh and aloes, each five drachms; aloe wood nine drachms; and grind them into powder, and mix with egg white. If the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is beneficial to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method for plaster good for twists: take nard and vismalva, each ten drachms; myrrh and aloes, each nine drachms; acacia six drachms; bolus armeniacum ten drachms, and grind well, and mix with water or egg white, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method for plaster for joints and for bones out of their places, and eases the pain occurring, and stops the bone growth, and fracture: take new linen, and soak it in hot water and cooked oil, and put on the place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore (the joint), but it is good for soothing a hot boil, and it removes pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another plaster to restore broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and earth pear leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to soften the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of woodbine, camomile, violet flowers, wheat flour (each one part); grind and mix with wine. If the limb is warm, mix with moist coriander water or water, and use it as a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger plaster than the first one for when a hard abscess comes to restore the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take root of woodbine, linseed, balm, melilot, sansuce, violet and camomile flowers (each one part); grind and mix with salt water, fresh water or wine, according to the warmth of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book not to apply anything to a broken limb for restoration except cerate made of wax and oil alone. He also says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems according to Galen that one should apply dry and slightly warm substances to a broken limb for restoration, such as myrrh, aloe, frankincense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method for plasters that is good for injury and pain: take mastic and chopped human hair or chicken feathers, and gum tragacanth, and mix them together equally, grind them into a paste, and apply it to the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then remove the plaster a little later, and ensure that the patient feels no pain nor has any movement of the bone from its place; if not, do not remove it for several days. But if pain or itching comes to the area, with heat or swelling, act quickly, remove the plaster, and wipe off the plaster gently; then take a light cloth and wet sea sponge, dip it in water, and lift up the affected area until the itching stops and the pain is relieved. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry wool moistened with rosewater or oil of roses to the bandage, tying it tightly until you are sure there is a warm wound; and when the inflammation has subsided and the pain is gone, begin again the gentle treatment, applying a little plaster but not too tightly as before. Continue this until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen has all gone away, and you need plaster and bandages, then recommence it, just as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if nothing comes to the limb of what we have said, then do not untie it until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture becomes apparent, and the joining of the flesh approaches; then tighten it more than before, and the swelling increases its flesh, as I have said earlier. And if you see that the place dries too much than is needed, know that nourishment cannot come there; therefore give then warm water to drink, every time you untie it, and this should be done every third day, and slacken a little the bandage. By this way, nourishment comes to the limb, and quickly corrects what foolish doctors do, who reset the limb crookedly: that is wicked, and such works are fearful, and I see nothing else but leave it and work correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various ways bones can break
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many ways bones can break and diverse shapes, and their causes differ; for there are breaks caused by the impact of a sword, where the neck bone shatters all the way down to the face that is beneath the bone, as if it were wood. And thus this type of break is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword cuts across the bone without piercing it, this type of break is called "absolute"; and both of these breaks cause wounds that are large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a blow from behind, or a split due to falling on stone or hitting it with the head, or from falling onto stones or similar events.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating break that approaches the membrane beneath the bone or is on top of it, this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that enters the bone as fine as a hair, and the fracture is small. This break is called "capillary"; And if there is a wound made by striking with stone or falling, which pushes the bone fragment inward like blacksmiths do when they strike on anvil, then the stone gets inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often in those who have moist bones in the head, such as children's heads; and it occurs in all these types of fractures where small pieces are dislocated like stars; and I will speak about this in its proper place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all types of fractures by their depression and by probing them, and by the rotted flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary fracture is known because when the bone is uncovered and rubbed with incense, the fracture opens black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating a fracture, beware of accidents that might affect the patient. If you observe any bad symptoms such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, rigidity, swelling, fever with chills, and eyes projecting and turning red, among other similar dispositions, then healing cannot take place without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any frightening accidents, and you hope for a good outcome, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounded first comes to you, especially in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day from the wound that you can see.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the flesh beneath the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes to the flesh that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to split the broken part thus: and take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover upon the bone in all ways that you can, and gently upon the appearance of the wound, and if blood flows or a boil appears, help him as it is needed, and fill the place with cloths moistened in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the boil is appeased, and be assured of no more bleeding; then begin to remove the bone around it, and this is done in two ways of work: one way is that you cut narrowly before it, and this is its shape:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another incision larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is thus: you should have several diverse incisions, some narrow and others wide, sharp-pointed, and made of fine iron; perform them easily, so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, you must pierce around it before applying incisions with trepanations, not too deep that they penetrate beyond the bone of the skull; each should have a guard or ring above the point to prevent the point from protruding through the bone. You should have several so that each fits properly on the edge of the bone, so you have trepans for all heads; this is the shape of the three types of trepans:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	To pierce around the broken bone: place the trepan on the bone and twist with both hands until you feel that the bone is pierced. Then move the trepan a little further along and repeat all around, then carefully cut away the space between the holes using scissors, doing so gently so as not to damage the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone and cleaned it, then you must reset the sharp edge that remains from the bone to all other tools resembling an inciser, but it must be more thin and more subtle than the other incisors; and if any small bones or scales remain, remove them gently with the instruments. Then dress the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another manner of work is that which Galien speaks of, which is hotter; he recommends it strongly, and these are his words.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture appears movable, so that once you have uncovered this part, you will place under the head of this lenticular inciser, of which this is the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut on one side, and the part is sharp on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone. Then strike gently with a small hammer, so that you easily break the bone all around, and beware of the membrane underneath; if it is adherent to the bone, remove it gently, for it can be removed without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the skin, and the bone is only cut on top, with small pieces present, then you must remove this asperity, and scrape away the scales using a fine file of which you should have various quantities to provide the most suitable in each case according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use coarse files initially, then proceed with finer ones, until it is well smoothed out.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	For each of the other types of capillary and subtle fracture cuts, you must adapt according to its direction; this is something not answered by one who has not devoted their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the sinew is exposed, then you must take one linen cloth according to the size of the wound, moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled over two or three times, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. Do this as lightly as possible so you do not weigh down the sinew, then apply another lien on top, and do not tie it too tightly except to merely hold the cloth against the wound; leave it like this for one or two days until the inflammation is eased, then remove it, and apply medicines such as lily roots, frankincense powder, incense powder, aristologist, and similar things. Make a powder of these ingredients and place it on the wound, and always apply medicaments without biting (i.e., do not use corrosive substances). Ensure that the wound is always clean, leaving no ointment or allowing bowels to accumulate on the brain's skin, for when bowels gather on the brain's skin, they corrupt and fester, causing great harm to the patient. For when one places something corrosive on the sinew, it necroses from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, be cautious if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, so it is doubtful whether there is doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no blackness comes out except because of the medicine that was applied, which has such power, then you should take one part honey and three parts rose oil and mix them with one drachm of gum, and place it on the sore; then cure it according to its manner of curing until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes both parts of the knee joint above are broken, or one by itself, because these are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous and does not break unless forced or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should place your little finger in the hole of the knee joint and put the break evenly against it with your index finger behind, until the knee returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the knee, and the thigh cannot come to its place, then you must align it at the head of a thick stick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is of two parts, then do likewise; and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can; but if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then apply to the head of the thigh bandages of linen cloths.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And if you bind one on another part where the fracture is; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the holes of the thigh.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some healers say that one must wet the bandages in butter and change them each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but rather the bandages should be moistened with a mixture of ground ivy and powdered mallow seed; then leave the bandage on until the bone is solid and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one applies goose feathers in place of tents, and if the swelling is hot, it holds the fracture in place, and let the patient blow through them.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if a boil comes near while you are working on it, then put cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a little of diacereum.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the boil does not come near, then put a plaster made of ground mustard seed and incense powder, cooked with egg yolk; then place light bandages over it, without binding tightly. And if the fracture is small but shattered into many pieces, extract them with suitable tools, then sew up the break and treat the wound as usual with plasters and salves; and if there is no wound inside the joint, then treat it with tents, placing splints of lead until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured below without any wound appearing, and the fracture is only slight with no more than two breaks, which can be easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index fingers into the patient's mouth; and if it is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger, then gently press the fracture inward with one hand while holding it even with the other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is displaced posteriorly in two places, you should provide traction of both sides until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth or fracture occurs, tie them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk; then place cerote on the broken jawbone and cover it with a double cloth. Place a well-made splint or an equal piece of leather on top, long and wide according to the jawbone, and fasten it at the angle where you can reach it. Instruct the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes shape, release it on the third day, and then put back what has been dislocated in its proper place; and apply a poultice of powder from the mill with plenty of eggs or sesame flour after removing the grease; and cover the poultice with light linen, and if the poultice heals and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed; often it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if swelling occurs from an abscess, apply what we have said many times
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both fracture and wound together, make sure no piece of bone has been broken off; carefully remove it with instruments suitable for that
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have removed all these pieces and none remain, sew the wound shut if it is wide, and apply one of the appropriate poultices to encourage healing until it is sound.
de la forcele	Of the cautery
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The cautery often breaks in front of the shoulder-blade and such breakage occurs in three ways: where it is broken but not dislocated in two places with pieces resulting in the easiest restoration; or where there is breakage along with wounding.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work of this is when there is breakage without wounding: you should have two assistants so that one holds the shoulder where the cautery has broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part. Then place your hands equally on either side of the break so that its shape is as it should be, with neither appearance nor displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, place under the shoulder of the patient a round bolster made of cloth or wool, its size according to your needs. Then lift and move the cautery, pressing the bolster against your hand so that you may set the break evenly as needed.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder blade at its front, because it comes from deep within, then the patient should lie on his back, place a pillow under his shoulder, and the assistant press down on the shoulder so that the bone of the shoulder blade is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then align the fracture with your two hands. If you find it difficult to do so, then cut across it. Remove the fragments gently. And if the bone cannot meet due to any obstacle, then make an incision on one of the incissors that you have; but place this tool under the shoulder blade as a warning.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it should look like a spoon and not be sharp, and be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the power of the work. And it should have two heads, one wide and the other narrow, just like the shape of the wound you made when you removed the bones. And once you are sure that there is hot inflammation, close the wound. But if the wound is small or you doubt there is hot inflammation, then fill the wound with lint and bandages according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an ulcer forms there, then soak a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and place it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The reduction of a bone fracture when it is without wounds and incisions is that you put on the plaster made from the flour of millet and eggshells, and place light pads on top, and put a pillow underneath the armpit if needed; then take a very large bandage one palm wide, then put the doubled cloth on top of the pads and the plaster; then take a thin splint three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and put the splint on the break, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the injured armpit; and tighten each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the break firmly, and you see clearly that the splint does not move over the broken bone, then rewet it every day, and when the wrapping loosens, then tighten it; and make the patient lie on their back, and put a small pillow underneath the armpit to lift the shoulder up; thus lighten the break by easing the tension of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck if no harm comes from it, for up to twenty days; then restart the plastering if needed, and tighten and leave it like that until it is healed; and it is healed in twenty-eight days at most, and fewer in some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the shoulder bone is broken or moved from its proper place, and it cannot be felt except by touch; then apply it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form in all possible ways; then put on the spot powder of wheat with plenty of egg yolk, and light bandages, and cover it with a double cloth; then put over it a wide and thin compress, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there are any hairs under the compress in some part of the shoulder, fill that hair with linen bandages so that the compress lies evenly; and then bind it all firmly with a large bandage so that the compress does not move from its place, and check the binding each day; and every time it loosens, tighten it, and keep the compress even if it has moved from its place, and have the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be reset in 20 or 25 days, And when this number is completed, then untie it, and be sure of it, for this is not bone that moves easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone sticks out, and points under the heart, so it pushes up, and causes pain, do as we have said in the breaking of the arm regarding quieting hot inflammation.
de la brisure dou pis	And about the fracture of the arm
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The arm is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the forearm.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it leans downwards, and the patient feels great pain, faintness, and shivering, and sometimes vomits blood; and the cheekbones appear through the broken bone.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on their back, and they put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of both sides with their hands, gently putting them even in all ways possible until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place bandages and dressings above the delicate splint made of salt or other light wood, and wrap it in one cloth, tying it onto the broken bone so that it does not move; and tie the knot around the back, tightening it properly, and tighten every hour until the swelling decreases; and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain or inflammation, then hurry up and loosen it, remove the bandage, and address what has come from ways of treatment; then renew the bandage, tightening it until it is secure.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that rib fractures occur mainly in large bones behind the back and at the head inside, and ribs break only because they are smooth; this is clearly felt upon examination of the sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you align the fracture as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the splint, and bind it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is inclined inward, then the patient feels very great pain and sharpness like pleurisy because the bone pierces the membrane; the patient also has difficulty breathing, coughs violently, vomits much blood, and this is a sign of severe illness, as the ancients said.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly to push the fracture back into place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, unless an abscess has formed if it was present.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes to this, then cure it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that one puts cupping glasses on the spot to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt whether the cupping glass will draw out the excesses to the place due to weakness of constitution.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should cover the spot with wet wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the bandage even, then treat it with the cure for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone piercing the skin, and there is doubt about the patient, then one must cut onto the spot of the broken rib, and place something underneath to guard the sac; and then one must trim the bone, gently pull it out, and afterwards sew the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess appears suddenly, then place cloths soaked in rose oil on it, and apply heat to the affected area; treat the area according to what is appropriate for an abscess, and keep it constantly warm on its side until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	Of a broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	A fracture of the neck bones does not occur often, and rarely is it dislocated; and likewise with the spine.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note if you see their hands are softened, swollen, and numb, and they cannot move or extend them; and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many cases; and if they move and feel when the joints are constrained or pricked, know that the articulation of the bone is saved, and that the patient can be cured with care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is healthy or not, then take heed if the feet are softened, and if accidents have occurred which are in the hands, and windiness and evacuation occur without will; and when one has slept on their belly, so does evacuation occur without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he sleeps on his back and wishes to turn over, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Such are those who are mortal: do not labor in their care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, then the matter is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you examine whether there is a hot abscess, and if so, apply rose oil or goose grease oil to it until it is appeased. Then place one of the comforting and drying emplasters on it, and bind it with linen, and instruct the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on that part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If any bone is dislocated, then bind tightly over the heart; remove the bone, then approximate the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with one stitch, then treat with ointment until it is healed. And if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the 'head of the cow', place your left hand's pouch there and make it equal to the other hand by force, then apply splints and bandages if needed; then bind tightly, and if there are dislocated bones, cut them off, remove them, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the thighbone is broken, and if it does happen, there will be a little diminution of movement at the hip; and it cuts with pain, declines toward the knee, and comes to the patient with pain and numbness, and swells where it breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the reduction is thus: you stretch your hand upwards until you are above the fracture; and know what is the fracture and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, then set that fracture evenly, until it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or inclines inward, then make the patient lie on their belly so that the reduction of that fracture may be apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And once you have set it evenly, then place the splint on top, followed by a wooden or bone roller, and compress the fracture so that it does not move; and place the support under the ribs so that the binding is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an inflammation occurs there, do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided, and then apply what we have mentioned before; and then return to the reduction, compressing it as is necessary if there are no bad complications; and that is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder-blade is that which lies between the rib-cage and the head of the shoulder; if it is broken, it should be reset in one of two ways. One way is to take a stick as thick as your thumb, shaped thus:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two heads of the stick with two cords and raise them up. Then have the patient sit on a seat. Then place the broken arm on the stick so that it comes to the shoulder-blade, and fits into a curve in the wood. Then place something heavy or let the assistant pull downwards. Then the physician should hold both sides of the break evenly with his hands until the break returns to its proper position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is to have the patient sit on his haunches. Then let him hold his hand at his neck. Then instruct two assistants: one to pull what is above the break with both hands, and the other to pull what is below it with all their strength, each stretching in his direction.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then hold the ligaments beneath and above the fracture, and extend each of the helpers to their respective parts.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then you must place one ligament beneath the angle and another towards the elbow beneath the fracture; and likewise if the fracture is towards the elbow, then you must gently place the ligature without effort until the fracture is even on its place and on the elbow; then set the fracture evenly as it should be and hold it steady in case any abscess occurs.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess occurs, do not hold the ligature for seven days and place a moistened cloth in oil of roses until the abscess is appeased; then hold it steady, and the method to hold it steady is: place the bandage on the fracture, bring the arm onto the shoulder, place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest, place the cloth on the shoulder and the arm, and pull towards the shoulder so that the arm is in its proper position unless something prevents it, or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use wedges and place a larger and stronger wedge on the break than the others, leaving two fingers' width between each wedge. Each wedge should be large enough to extend three fingers beyond the break on both sides; then press on the wedges as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the break, firmly but without straining the limbs apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the wedges' base and their pressure as we have said in the wound where you reset the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, leave it alone for seven days as we have said; then check each day whether any itching or swelling occurs at the site where the ligature cannot reach the limb due to its being too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it does not heal, as we have said
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, then do not untie the ligature until three days or more have passed, and have the patient lie on their back with their hands on their stomach. Place one cushion filled evenly with wool under the shoulder, and watch every hour of the day or night to ensure that the broken limb's alignment does not change nor the ligatures become loose. Then heal it through the power of medicine, and give them the food we have mentioned earlier, in such a way that at first it is subtle, then gradually thicker.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be immobilized for 40 days after which one should remove them, administer baths and ointment medications to correct the position.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and stuck in place, it must remain immobilized for 50 days or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	Regarding the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones called the 'fuscile', one of which is small and guides the thumb, while the other is large and situated below towards the little finger. Sometimes only the large bone breaks, or sometimes only the small one, but occasionally both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bone is broken, healing is easy and recovery swift. However, when the large bone is broken, healing is difficult and more painful than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, it should be gently pulled out straight and set evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large hip joint, then it must be pulled harder; and stretch him over the pillow, and hold your hand pouch higher than the others, and let the little finger hang lower than the other fingers, and have the patient lie crossed upon himself, and place the pillow higher before him so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the minister's arm to the part below his hand or elbow, and another minister at the other end above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then the physician puts it back in place according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there is fragmentation in the break, then place each piece back in its proper place, and if any fragment is too small to grasp with forceps, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut around it and remove the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a wound accompanying the fracture, I spoke about that in the separate chapter on wounds; so take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if, at the beginning of restoration, boils appear, then apply a bandage made of cerote cloth softened with rose oil and white wax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft. Bind the bandage gently until the boil subsides.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the cerote and apply a plaster made of millstone powder mixed with abundant egg white. Next, place the splints, ensuring that the main splint is always stronger and slightly wider than the others. Know that there should be six splints on the arm in various arrangements: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and bind more tightly above the fracture than elsewhere, gradually decreasing tension as you move away from it, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. And let the bandages on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or harsh; and let the thread used for binding be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the joint after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should wash the limb with hot water until that itching is appeased; and let the limb rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin the bandaging, and if the joint is loosened and the bone dislocated, or similar things, so treat it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if it happens that the bandaging cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you should soften it a little and leave it thus for some days until the bandaging reaches, and then tighten it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, then do not unbind it for up to 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And otherwise, then place the hands around the neck, and make them even, and beware of movement and dislocation, and sleep on the back; and know that this dislocation can be restored in 30 days or in 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and temperaments of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and on our two hands there are few breaks, and there only comes much bending many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then the patient should hold his arms crossed, and sit upright before him evenly; then place his hand on the table extended, and the minister stretches the broken bones, and the master aligns them until they are well joined; and places the plaster and bandages if there is no abscess, then puts a splint according to the size of the area; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is on the edge around the belly of the palm, then make a splint of bandages and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken palm; then bind it with a long cloth, and let the splint be made of soft wood as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the end, you should place one splint above and another below in the sole such that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and make the tie tight between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture occurs at any of our fingers, especially if it is the thumb, set it straight as it should be; and bind it with the sole, and if you see fit, place a small upright splint to lift the fracture so that it does not move. And if the fracture is in another finger, such as the index or one of the others, set it straight, and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; either tie them all together at once, whichever way works best, or place a splint on top like you would with the thumb. Take care with the restoration and arrangement of hot abscesses, and treat those who come to it as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of a broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is clear when it turns front to back; and the treatment for this is to bind one lien above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each minister extends their bandage to their side evenly; and this is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the hip, one bandage should be toward the thigh, and the other bandages below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And likewise if it is near the knee, then one bandage should be by the knee, and its extension below; then the surgeon places the bone evenly with both hands so that it returns to its natural shape, and then applies the splint and binding, especially if inflammation does not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot inflammation, leave it to cool, then return to your work and treatment; the binding is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture a hard doubled bandage, two or three layers thick, and hold it in place with splints; then turn the leg so that the heel reaches the root of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the hip and the leg below the knee, bringing the ends up; then wrap the bandage over the leg and hip again, then place splints on the fracture, and place one splint on the shinbone; then fill the space between the leg and hip with soft cloths to ensure even pressure, then begin tying tightly three or four times around the fracture; as you go higher up the fracture, tie less tightly; then reach for the two ends of thread that you inserted between the leg and hip, tie them together over the splints placed above; then return down to the bottom end of the thread until you reach the foot; and tie it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus until no swelling, inflammation or other similar condition appears.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it occurs, then dislocate it, and realign what has moved, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, they must be removed if possible; and if not, then the place must be split open, and burned with fire. And treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thighbone breaks in this manner when nails are inserted into it, such as in the shoulder or arm; nevertheless, in such restoration, the limb does not become deformed.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thighbone is restored in about 40 days, or a bit less or more, according to the various constitutions of individuals.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the cruciate ligament of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the cruciate ligament of the knee there is little breakage, but it often stretches.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is merely a split or hole, which happens in every wound, and without wound, and this is well-known.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is this: put what is round on its two sides until it is assembled and can move; then place the bandage, and if you need one, add a rounded pin, and tighten as necessary; then review all the positions that we have described in other breaks, such as a hot abscess and similar things; apply to each accident whatever is needed until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that the leg has two bones, of which one is rightly called «crus» and the other «tibia»; and all kinds of breaks come to it as they do to the arm, and for this reason its restoration is done in the same way as that of the arm, and the work is entirely the same. And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible; and it turns inward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply traction, set it straight, and bind the splints evenly; but nonetheless, if the break is ugly with many pieces, make the traction lighter and gentler; and lift according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of forked wood that embrace the leg on both sides, their length from the knee downwards. Then wrap them in two places with bandages above and below, tie them in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left, which is good. Some add one support of wood along the length of the leg for further protection, and place the leg at rest to prevent movement. This is particularly done if there is a wound at the break. Move the leg each day to check for heat or other signs of inflammation. Continue the treatment until it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the breaking of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no breakage, but sometimes a break occurs in the bones of the foot and in the toes; only shaking happens in many positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is breakage in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones protruding over each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground, as if they wanted to walk, and then put your foot on theirs where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places; then apply a splint and compresses, and place a small table with two heads under the belly of the foot, then bind it tightly, and wrap it with bandages and other things as needed.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones even and healed.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if some of the toes are broken, restore them as we have said for the toes of the hand; then put a splint on the broken toe according to its length and make it slightly wider, then place the table I mentioned under the foot and bind it tightly; and if there are two or three or more broken toes, place a splint on each one according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the table under the foot; let them stand upright at the head of the table so that they extend well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have mentioned for other fractures, which we have discussed; and treat each injury as it ought.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the fracture of the bone of the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, have her sit with her legs apart, then lean her towards the back part and hold her from behind. Fill the hollow of her nature with cotton, as thick as one's fist, then raise the woman slowly, little by little, until the cotton reaches the entrance of her nature and the bone returns to its place. When she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has done so, replace it. Do this for about seven days or thereabouts: the fracture will be healed. If you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie a tube to the opening, and blow into the tube until the bladder is full inside her nature. Then fill her with cotton and leave it like that for some days until she is well.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the little finger of man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the thigh; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from those who set their study and practice on it, and hear my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	But breaking signifies in many cases the right path to restoration: therefore follow it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of a broken penis, take a goose quill and insert it into the penis; then wrap bandages around it and let it remain for three days or so until it is healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	with wounding break
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with wounding, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be healed immediately, so that the healing which we have said may testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then apply a dressing of vitriol, if you have nothing else; then begin to reset the break at that same hour or day, unless an abscess forms.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess occurs there, let the restoration continue until the ninth day, so that the abscess may be healed; and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is visible breaking over the uncovered heart, then it is necessary that you put it back in place lightly with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear easy to make equal with your hands, then reset it with this iron tool, which is seven or eight fingers long, and its width should match the size of the wound; and the smith must shape it into three or four sides, according to what is needed in each treatment of a break; and let it be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend during compression on the limb at your work; and it should be pointed in front and thick in the middle forward, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called 'palainche,' which means the curved head should be placed on the visible bone of the joint; then push it back once until it returns to its original position, and align them evenly.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is delicate, and the tool cannot grip the bone well, then you must cut off the head of the bone so that the tool can grasp it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot realign the bone as we have said, then with an appropriate tool such as a saw or scalpel, cut carefully and cautiously at your power's limit.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is realigned but the patient still feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	So do whatever it takes to put it back in its natural place. Then, moisten a cloth in black styptic wine and cleanly apply it if it's summer time. Do not apply any grease or oil on the wound as it may cause infection. Afterward, administer bandages once you've reset the bone, leaving the wound open. Cut away excess skin around the wound according to its size, taking care that the wound is not constricted with the fracture. Many foolish physicians have done this and caused harm or death to patients due to corruption. Therefore, ensure that the bandage is softer and gentler than usual for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that something bad may happen there, as we have said, and you find pain at that place, then do not apply cauterizing irons; but wrap hard bandages around it instead.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after the first or second day that the wound is beginning to close, then remove what you have applied with all vinegar, and apply healing ointment to it, such as treacle ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must wash the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is clean and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be bandaged in such a way that the wound drains easily downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and it does not heal but the wound keeps opening again, know that there are small bone fragments there, which is why you must scrape the wound with a spoon and remove all these unnecessary pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula occurs in the place, or another manner of corruption, then you must cure it according to what is said in its chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, like the thighbone or shoulder blade, and others similar ones of large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times death results. Leave it until it rots. By chance it will fall off after 20 or 30 days later, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the sparks that come from the soldering
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often find afterwards the health of the bone broken, especially when it is near the joint, and it is ugly to see the figure of the limb; and by chance the limb cannot perform its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore beware if the bone is fresh: then let the administrator apply medicines that are astringent, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others. Take any of these things or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with egg yolk or with axle grease; put them on the bone in compresses, bind it well, and do not remove it for several days. Then remove it, and start again with another one until the swelling is gone. Or you can press upon a piece of polished lead well-made; for the property of lead is that it removes all swellings from the limbs. And if the swelling has already turned hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut off the excess. Or have it shaved by some barber until it is removed, and cure it until it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the limb which is weak after recovery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the break in the bone is healed, and afterwards the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one of which is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or because there were too many movements, not at the right time; or because there was little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is: feed the patient and make their body soft until blood increases within them; have them take baths, give them joy and happiness; then apply pitch to the limb so that it attracts great nourishment, and frequently wash it with warm water until nourishment reaches the limb; and let it return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	When a limb is twisted after healing,
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When a limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone breaks open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb again anew, for many foolish physicians have done this in our land; and these works are blamed, and great harm comes from them, and sometimes death; yet if the joints and the twisted parts are fresh, they should be soaked in hot water, or herbs that soften should be cooked, such as fig leaves and roots and melilot and similar things; and make a moistening plaster, such as diacoulion well made, and you take the mucilage of figs, and cook it with goose grease or sesame oil, and make a plaster therewith; or you take fat figs, and grind them with fennel seed, and similar medicines that soften the union.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes dislocation occurs from prolonged and continuous friction with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And arrange gentle movement for the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the dislocations are twisted and hardened like stone, and need to be removed with iron, then one must cut right up to the bone with a sharp scalpel; and take care and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves from its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation happens to someone, one must promptly reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the place becomes inflamed, and perhaps is hardly reset to its proper position; therefore one must not move it while it is swollen: many times it causes spasms and other pains. Nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient rest, until the swelling has subsided; then elevate the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as they come into their proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged chapters on dislocations from head to toe.
des mandibules	of jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It sometimes happens that the jaws are dislocated on both sides, and this dislocation occurs in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their places and softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the chest, so that saliva flows out of the mouth and he cannot hold it in or close his mouth, and speech becomes tangled.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is slight, it returns with several manipulations.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it hastily, without delay; and in such a manner that the attendants hold the head of the patient, and the master places his pouch with one hand on the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is double-sided; and let both hands be ready, to apply pressure evenly; and instruct the patient to soften their jaws, moving them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the master holds it steady until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reset is difficult, even if both jaws are reset together, warm water and oil should be used until they reset easily; do not delay the reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes without softening, then place moistened cloths made of rose oil and wax on it, then bind it lightly with soft bandages; let the patient sleep on their back, with both shoulders between two pillows so that they do not move to the right or left, nor strain themselves when chewing, but eat soft food until the pain subsides and the jaws are healed. Then they may eat what they wish easily, without opening the mouth excessively while eating and drinking, until the jaw is completely healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset accurately within one hour, and are not returned to their places, then fever and continuous shivering follow, and possibly abdominal dropsy, and sometimes vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see that, know that it is lost; and many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	Of the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate from within its continuity and from the fish (i.e., the hand), but sometimes it dislocates backwards, which can be felt clearly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the reduction is as follows: have the patient lie on their back and extend their arms; then press firmly with your palm at its location, and it will return to place. Then apply the splint and bandage, ensuring that the head towards the side does not dislocate again; if it does, reset it back into place as we have described, then reapply the splint and bandage, securing it tightly. Instruct the patient to rest until they are healthy again; similarly, the shoulder blade is reduced when it is dislocated from its position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways the shoulder can become dislocated: first, it dislocates at the part of the collarbone underneath; second, at the breastbone; and sometimes it dislocates above, which happens rarely. It does not dislocate behind or inside for the nerves, and often dislocates below towards the collarbone, especially those with a lot of flesh, as they quickly become dislocated; those with less flesh hardly ever dislocate and rarely return.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	Sometimes men suffer an injury or fracture, causing the shoulder to swell with a hot abscess and leading them to believe it is dislocated.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must examine it until you are certain; then begin treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	Dislocations are recognizable when they occur towards the collarbone. You will find a clear difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one; at the top of the shoulder, you will feel a hollow, and below the collarbone, you will feel the head of the shoulder as if it were an egg. The patient cannot bring their hand to their side or move it in any way. If the dislocation is above, it is not concealed but is easily detectable upon touch. This type of dislocation can only be reset if it is recent or if the patient is a child.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the servant lifts the hand of the sick person upwards, then places his fingers beneath the shoulder blade, and forces the joint upwards to its place; and the servant lifts the hand, and extends it upwards, then places it beneath - so it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days after, then the sick person should be bathed in warm water; and the servant should prepare a softening and soothing ointment, such as decoction of mallow and fenugreek and melilot in water, and this should be applied. Then the sick person should be placed on their back, and a cloth of even thickness, not too soft or hard, should be placed beneath the shoulder blade; then the physician places his heel on the cloth and gently lifts the head of the shoulder bone, and pulls the hand of the sick person; another servant should hold the head of the sick person so that it does not move downwards. The shoulder returns immediately to its place, and if you wish, reset it according to this manner: and it is necessary that a man who is taller than the sick person be present; he should stand upright next to the ribcage, and put his shoulder beneath the shoulder blade of the sick person, and lift the shoulder upwards so that the sick person hangs from the arm; another servant pulls the hand of the sick person downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, hang with him some heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the dislocation is also reset in another manner: take a long stick and fix it into the ground so that the head of the shoulder leans on it as on a pillar, but neither too thick nor too thin; then place it under the patient, with soft cloths underneath him, and let the patient lie along the length of the wood; then stretch his hand downwards from another side correctly, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return despite all these things that we have said, do this cure: take a stick of 2 palms' length and 4 fingers' width, which has a round head for easy entry into the socket deep under the shoulder blade, in this manner:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then place the head of the wood wrapped in cloths on top of the shoulder so that the wood does not burn the patient; then place it under the shoulder blade of the patient; and stretch his arm over the long wood, and tie the shoulder to the wood, and the hand at the elbow, then place the arm over the edge of a wide stool, and let the hand hang downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, however that may be, then you must place beneath the armpit a spherical wad of wool evenly, then put on top of the whole shoulder and around the plaster prepared with flour of millet mixed with incense and egg albumen, then press firmly beneath the armpit, twist the bandage over the plaster, and wrap your hand around its neck.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And he should apply poultice sparingly so that the limb is comforted for it will heal faster; then apply more after six or seven days and move it. And if it is firmly closed but not softened, then it has healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is forced out of place due to moisture that has come or for another reason, then you must administer cauteries through three holes as it is set forth in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and after seven days the dislocation does not mend, nor can he raise his arm above his head, then know that the nerves of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened. And know that the joint will never be set back in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that occurs towards the breastbone, and breasts, or behind is caused by forceful impact and stretching of hands, administered by another person. Treat it until it is cured.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there is stiffness in the limb and slowness of movement, then the patient should apply many baths until that stiffness is alleviated and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated towards its front and returns to its front; and if it is dislocated on all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation has not been reduced, for one can see it well and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you align the sick neck with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is knocked out of place and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it before an abscess forms there, for if an abscess forms there, it would be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is at the back; thus it is worse than other dislocations, causing greater pain, and sometimes death ensues.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that you can return it to its place with your two hands; and extend his arm with both of yours; and spread his arms apart, and the hands of the healer around the elbow above and below, and place the joint at his fingertips together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it will return when you bend his hand towards his palm, and press from the root of the palm where the elbow is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is necessary that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold it so that it does not move during extension; then twist the arm on each side, then wrap a long and wide cloth around it; and when the healer has joined the joint with his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint forcefully until it returns; and when it is in its place, then put on a dry compress with egg yolk, and bind it tightly, and suspend the arm around the patient's neck, and leave it for a few days, then untie it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then untie it gently and leave it be; and if you see that the joint is not properly aligned, then recommence the setting and tie it up gently and leave it thus for several days until it is firmly set; then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if there is great heat after the reduction of the joint and it moves, then bathe it gently and rub it warmly and press until it is soothed; or place on the joint a poultice of fat sheep's wool, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it and place it in hot water; and when it sweats, wipe the joint temperately, then replace the poultice and enter into the bath; and thus do this twice or three times until it is healed; and if you see fit, then place on fresh moist fern heated with butter and hold it on; then it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	If the joint of the hand is dislocated and its reduction is easy, then it must be reset quickly in the same position where it was dislocated, before the place becomes swollen or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the reduction is performed thus: place the injured hand on a table, extend the fingers of the patient, and gently place your own palm over the joint's prominence. Push firmly until it returns to its normal position. Always ensure that it is properly reduced in place. Then have the patient place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's palm on the table and gently press your own hand onto the prominence of that joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it goes back now, then all is well. But if not, apply warm compresses to relieve inflammation and prevent the dislocation from recurring again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and does no harm to the patient except that his hand is weakened, and he can grasp nothing entirely: know then that the nerve or artery is severed; there is no other means of healing except by cautery near the case, and perhaps nothing else would help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the bandage that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and let it remain thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any stiffness, then apply warm water compresses, and rub it until it is smooth.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated at each joint, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly; therefore, reduce the dislocation until it returns to its place, then support the head of the finger and bend it towards the side where it is dislocated; leave it for two days, then straighten it that day; and tie it as we have said, and untie it on the third day, and move it, and tie it again tightly; do this often until it is stable. Do the same if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do so until it is healed.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of the dislocation of the hip bone of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the hip bone of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are many dislocations, then there is no remedy, for the person hastens the patient's death.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign is that the evacuations come forth without control, and cannot be held back, and many times some member becomes softened, either both thighs or both arms or one; And often the hip bone moves in four parts; that which moves at the rear is called 'gilbositez': but there is no remedy or healing for it all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from a fall or blow or similar things, the ancient ones had ways of cure with great words, but there is not always great benefit in them; but I have shortened it according to my intention and made tools in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling which comes to the breast in front, none has health; and likewise that which comes directly on both sides, and one cannot cure it but oneself who knows properly how to deal with it when it comes to the back, as I say. And let the patient be stretched out on their face in a flat place, and have something firm underneath them so they do not bruise themselves; then stick one stake at the head firmly into the ground, and another at the feet, and tie one rope beneath the elbows of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers know how to hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes; and let them be held firmly, as we have said, and the physician place his palms on the spine firmly until it moves.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not move with this treatment, then take a board of three feet in length and place it under the patient, and let the patient lie on their side, and put the head of the board under the spine, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and let the physician put his feet on the other end of the board and press firmly until it moves back into place. And if you see, do this to the one that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you drive two stakes into the head of the invalid's arm, one on each side, and at a distance of a palm's length between them; and let there be a hole in each stake where the cord will turn, and let the stakes be firmly fixed in the ground so they do not move; and between each pair of stakes, place a turning stake on which the cord will turn, with two smaller stakes of a palm's length to turn the turning stake; then tie the cord that is among the stakes at the head to one turning stake, and the other cord at the foot to the other turning stake, and each minister shall turn his turning stake on all the cord, and the master shall place the bandage evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, then place a dried plaster with abundant eggs upon it, and then the poultice, and then the bandage of a tablet three fingers wide, which shall cover the place of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a cord as we have said, and let the patient use gentle nourishment until they are healed; and if any complication arises at the end of the healing process, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines along with the bandage that we have mentioned before; and sometimes one should apply a piece of lead, and sometimes the swelling appears on the back spine, and it is thought to be dislocation; but this is the bone that protrudes, therefore one must not be presumptuous: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that at the joints of the hip and shoulder dislocation occurs alone, not as with other joints. The joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: within and without, and front and back; and more especially within others, and rarely before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the sign of its dislocation within is that when one joins the lame leg with the sound one, it appears longer and the lame knee opens more widely than the sound one. The lame cannot bend his knee at the fire; and the place near which there is swelling from an abscess is hot because the head of the thigh has moved there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that which moves without is that these accidents are opposite to those in front.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of that which happens in front is that the leg seems well-formed; nevertheless, it does not bend at the knee without pain. If one wants to make it go forward, it cannot do so, and it retains its urine. The ankle swells, and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of one to whom it happens behind is that he cannot extend his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the angle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in its place under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment for this type of dislocation is that if the dislocation is ancient and remains in its position, there is no need for treatment; and it should not be approached with presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for one whose dislocation is fresh and there are four types of dislocation, you should quickly return the joint to its place, extend it outward and inward, move it to the right and left. Perhaps it will return to its original position and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong minister and extend the leg strongly with both hands or tie one of them on the knee; and another minister should place his hand above in such a way that he places his hands under his buttocks, then gently pull up on the thigh; and another holds the end of the rope; and all stretch simultaneously upward and downward until the patient is lifted off the ground at once and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similar joints. If the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you must treat its counterpart. When the dislocation is at the hip joint, you should lay the patient on their sound side, place a rope under the root of the thigh and below the angle of the pelvis, then stretch the rope upwards towards the angle and the gluteal region; then have some assistants take his arms and embrace the larger bone of the thigh, extending it forcefully: now it will return to its proper place. This manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have described, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a soft, strong rope on both heels and knees, keeping the injured leg stretched out about two spans more than the other; then hang him from the top of a pole, with his arms hanging down about two spans off the ground. Then command one assistant to embrace the top of the thigh, while another hangs from the patient, forcefully embracing the thigh as the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the hip, let the patient lie down as we have said in the case of those with kyphoscoliosis; and apply traction to the ligaments above the injured leg properly, and also above the foot. Then place two sticks: one at the head and one at the feet. Then insert one stick between the thighs of the patient in this manner. And have moist bandages ready around it so that the patient does not blister. Then each attendant extends towards him, and the physician places his hand evenly on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, then place him on a board and press down as we have said in the case of kyphoscoliosis, and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is anterior, then extend the injured leg promptly, and as I have said; and let the physician place his knee on the angle of the injured leg, then press with his other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	**And if the dislocation is at the hip,** do not extend the patient downwards nor raise them onto the ground, but they should be placed as if their hip were dislocated at the back, as we have said concerning childbirth on the two hips; and they should lie on their face, with the sheet extended as we have previously stated, and one must press upon the joint with a table; it will be set when the patient extends their legs, and they are even. Then join the thighs together, place the splint, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move. Let them rest for three or four days, then untie it, and replace the splint. If you see that they are even, then bind again as before and let them rest for three days. Then untie it, and make them walk gently until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	**Regarding dislocation of the knee,**
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, inward and outward, and backward; it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign of this is that you should tell the patient to bend their leg towards their hip, and if it does not move smoothly, know that they are dislocated. And the treatment for all these is that you make the patient sit upright, extend their leg as much as possible, place your back against their thigh, and put their foot on yours; then grasp their knee with both hands and draw it towards your belly, then strongly press both sides of the knee joint inward; and another assistant extends their foot until the knee returns to its proper position, and the sign is that they can easily move their leg smoothly at the hip. Then place a bandage over it, make them keep the leg against the hip, and bind them tightly for three or four days, then release them. And the patient should not walk until the limb has healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not properly aligned, then strongly extend it, as we have said in the treatment of hip dislocation, until it is sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	And of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes twisted and sometimes fully dislocated both inward and outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is that the ankle swells, and tends forward towards the part where it is dislocated; the reduction is easy, and one should gently extend it with their hands when it is only twisted.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, you should make the patient sit upright, and pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then left hand twice, stretch it upwards, and place the foot gently upwards; do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it does not return, repeat the procedure, as it may return. If it still cannot be reduced in this way, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, firmly plant a pole in the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around to prevent injury to the patient; then one attendant holds the thigh, and another extends the foot with their hands or using a loop tied onto the heel; then both extend equally, and the pole should always be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient steady when stretching it; then the physician gently reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another attendant holds the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is ready, then apply the plaster and bandages tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ligature is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature loosens, then tighten it; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if they walk before this time, it is not certain that they will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a boil happens to appear, then you must calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	Of the eyes
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the eyes are dislocated, they should be gently extended without effort; this is an easy task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the foot, then you should have the patient sit on a level place or on a table completely upright, and put your foot on what opens from those joints, then press on your foot firmly until it returns; and when it is even and nothing opens there, then put under the sole of the foot a two-legged table, then bind it tightly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let them rest until they are healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to reset it, often the patient dies: therefore be not presumptuous in treatment unless you are skilled in the art and have practiced it long, and are pitiful and merciful and cautious, not hasty; and at first use things that cool inflammation hot, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place before the inflamed swelling comes on; and when the limb is in place, then apply things that cool inflammation hot, and treat the wound with drying ointments as it should be done; and if with dislocation there is fracture, and small bones dislocated, set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and guard yourself from entering into fear's path, according to what I have said, for this avails you more according to your Creator, and for the sake of your weapon and body.
Amen	May it be so.
