I, my very dear son, have completed this book for you, which is the end of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have finished it by its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I will complete this for you with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is entirely unknown everywhere, the science and craft are perishing and decaying, and nothing remains of it from foreign lands except for small descriptions of the ancients that the hands have corrupted. And because of this (cause), errors and vanities have come, and intentions are closed and wisdom is driven away.
I seem to wish to bring it to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration and abbreviation. And I shall come with the forms of the iron cauteries, and other instruments of work together with the arrangement of their declaration and preparation as required.
And because no good master of hand is found in our times, the art of medicine is prolonged. And one who undertakes it should be summoned in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of limbs, and their shapes and joints and separations thereof, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and marrow and the number of bones, and the movement and the resting places and the veins moving and the stationary ones, and the location of their origin.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that the name without the work is nothing; and especially in the art of medicine.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not skilled in the things mentioned above, let him beware lest he err and kill men.
As I have often wished for many who engage in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
I saw a madman who lanced an abscess of scrofulas from a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of her neck. because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another madman who removed a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut it he would die.
And I saw another madman who took care of our land's duke who had his leg broken, and with the breakage he had a wound;
and the ignorant madman straightened the break over the wound with strong pressure, and did not leave salve on the wound, and left it thus incomplete.
And command him not to dislocate it.
And keep the leg until it has completely swollen and the feet have come to destruction.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and dislocate the leg. And when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it could not heal it.
And the corruption did not stop going through the member until all the limb was completely destroyed.
And it is necessary for another person to flatten an abscess and then burn it through the evil of his power.
For a chancre, when it is pure of black bile, it should not be touched with iron if it cannot be completely removed from that place where the corruption is.
Therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two categories. namely, surgery where there is danger in many ways;
And I will show in every part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you protect yourself, so that the foolish fool cannot speak ill of you.
Take your arms in custody, and begin with your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised.
And leave the incurable diseases of great sickness;
And remove your arms from that which causes doubt in you, and be vigilant within yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen said in some of his admonitions: Do not treat an evil disease lest you be called a foolish healer.
"I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterization and the cauterization of medicinal diseases, and these chapters are ordered from head to feet;
and the forms of instruments, the irons for cauterization, and everything else that is necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about blistering and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and these chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and these are ordered from head to feet, and the forms of instruments.
Therefore, remembering the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest and most subtle words and secret responses.
and on this topic spoke many wise men and agreed with it.
and they supported my words, for I shall shorten them.
I say that cautery helps universally to all constitutions where there is matter, whether it be one or two constitutions: this means warm constitution with matter and dry constitution with matter.
In a warm and dry constitution along with matter, some said and declared that cautery is of great help: and the others said the opposite: that cautery does not help in disease that comes from heat and dryness. Because the nature of fire is hot, it should not be used to cure a hot disease with heat or dryness.
and he who said the opposite, that cautery provides great help to a hot and dry disease that comes in men's chests. For when you examine the body of a man and his moisture according to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree to this statement. For I have found it sometimes through experimentation.
And in all ways, do not interfere except for those who have experienced it and who know through long use the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of illness, and their symptoms and the duration and time span.
We are not afraid of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all men should conform and agree to the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery together with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and it does not go beyond the member that is burned, and it does no harm to another member unless named.
Burning medicines come from one member to another when dislocated, causing illness of great healing to the member; And by chance, the patient dies.
The fire due to its high temperature and the goodness of its substance does not burn if there is no excess.
I have found this through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is above truth in matters.
And because of this I excuse myself for the length of my speech, for it does not please me to reveal the secret of fire and the quality of the work, how it extinguishes diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstration. Or accept it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time the cauteries should be done and chose companions.
And I say that the fire cautery is appropriate at all times because the harm occurring is kept under control by the aid of the fire cautery. And similarly, if the cautery is necessary because of severe pain, it should be done immediately before any greater harm comes to the limb.
Do not ever think, dear child, as foolish people do; for the disease that is cured by cautery will have no return; and they say so.
and they say so. But it is not as they think, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors that cause pain, and is more effective than medicine due to its speed of action and the power of its work and its dominion.
And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its nature.
And in him are accumulated the superfluidities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered where there is little superfluidity and moisture, as cauterizations for pain, and such pain does not return. But this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the rear of medicine, and it is indeed so.
But they do not believe that cauterizations are effective after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterizations are the rear of medicine because when we administer means of treatment for any disease and they do not work, then we administer cauterization, and it works.
Therefore, it is appropriate to know that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not only according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are softened more than iron, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
and said that the lead of the cautery does not cause pustulation, but this is not true because I have proven it, and found that it is true in some men.
and cauteries made of gold are softer than iron, as they said. And even when you heat an instrument made of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it may suddenly cool.
and if you heat it too much; it makes fire. And thus there is enough impediment.
I have ordered you this chapter about the head from the neck to the feet, because the path will be easier to find.
This cautery is good for both moist and dry conditions on the skull, and it is used to treat a disease known as "soda," as well as various humors that descend from the head into the eyes, ears, and cause many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and also for all diseases caused by coldness, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by soluble medicine for 3 to 4 days depending on his condition and the potency, duration, and accustomed tolerance of the sickness. and then apply the hot iron to the head of the patient.
Then make him sit crosswise between your hands, place his hands on a flat surface.
After that, lay the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; Where your thumbs meet, if it bleeds there, heat the cautery called 'olivare', this is its form. And place it on its joint marked with ink, and do so by drawing and straining your hand little by little while twisting. Then straighten your hand immediately, and return the joint if you see the bone protruding. And if you don't see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you;
After taking a piece of linen cloth, put it wet and soft cotton inside, place it on the joint, and leave it for 3 days;
Then cover it with moistened wool. Leave it until the burn is removed. Then heal the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmacon", until it is healed.
And as the ancients said, when an injury remains open for longer, it drains more. and therefore helps heal.
And said one of them that the fire cautery should be left until part of the bone is burned, and then heal the one who was burned from the bone, and it should be cured.
And others say that the cautery should be applied as much as possible, and pressed so hard that it forces out the bone as wide as a woman's thimble, because the fluids escape more easily.
and the wound must be kept open for a long time; afterwards it should be cured and bandaged.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem good in all cases, except for certain men who are fearful.
and I seem to leave it alone.
because the head is weakened by continuous liquids of nature, as we have witnessed in other members;
And the same applies when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first sign of cautery is more beneficial and healing for me, and from this use I have found salvation.
When chronic and lasting pain comes in the head, it is necessary for the patient to use earwax and pills called "cochie", and purge of the head and oils and plasters. and if he is given the cautery as we have said before, it is not effective. Be careful that the patient's shoulder is of strong nature, and it should not be too cold; Then cauterize below that cautery a small amount as we have said above. After performing a fire cautery on each horn of the skull up to the bone, as previously mentioned, and perform the cautery called "vasselz". and the area where vacuum bellows are placed. and press your hand so that you do not see up to the bone. the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later.
and the cauterization of the horns should be more delicate than that of the middle part of the head, and this is the form.
on the cautery of the head When sudden pain comes in one part of the head and the disease spreads to the eye, and the head is purged with divers medicines, and other treatments that I have mentioned in the section on diseases are performed, but none of it helps: Then make cauteries according to two methods, namely of hot medicines and of fire.
For the cautery of hot medicines, take an alum stone, remove its bark and cover one end of it with wax, then apply it to the area where the pain is located in such a manner that you can place the alum stone underneath the skin.
And when it is reset, let it stay properly and leave it like that for 12 hours; Then remove the splint and apply garlic oil to the wound and leave it as it is for 2 or 3 days; then place cotton soaked in butter over it until it becomes soft.
After the ointment is applied, let it heal.
If you see fit, use some of the burning remedies I have written about or treat with 10 of the burning remedies I have written about.
The fire cautery is such as this. Heat the cauterization tool in the shape of this [mold/form].
It is called "closed" because the wound resembles a small container or cup shape.
Place it on the painful spot and hold your hand firmly over it, gently press it for a short while until half the thickness of the coal is burned;
And lift your hand so that the arteries do not burn, which are away from it, and draw out an abundance of blood.
Put cotton on it in linen cloth and leave it there for three days; Then put a damp cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed;
And if you want to burn out this abscess with the cautery called "cultellare", at its tip, be careful not to pierce the artery in this abscess which is not old.
From migraine
When treating an abscess as we have said before in the treatment of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries mentioned by the medicine do not help, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white;
And so, on the side of the joint, draw a line half a thumb's length long, and then press once with your hand, holding back so as not to touch the artery nor reach the bone.
And watch the jaw that becomes paralyzed when one eats, and let the nerves have no gaze but at the paralysis and that spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut or fear should arise in great measure, especially for those who are not familiar with it and untrained. And leave the operation in its course;
But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the illness and the patient is suffering, cauterize it near the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals.
if you see that the artery extraction is necessary and it requires a cautery with two blades. and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
From the pain of cold ears
When the ear brings pain from cold and medicines soluble and other treatments mentioned in the division have been applied but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", as follows:
After pointing all around the sick ear, or both sides where the pain is, move a little away from the root of the ear after you have marked the spot. and have ten points around each ear.
then treat the spot until it heals.
Of the torment of the mouth
Torture to be cured by fire cautery is not applicable except for those that move due to flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
And do not perform a cautery on similar conditions arising from scabs and nerves swellings.
When treating this condition of torture that moves due to flux of eyes, head purges and gargles, it is not worth it; therefore you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries. One in the root of the ear, another slightly further from the temple, and the third near the junction of the two lips.
and place the cautery in the healthy part of it, and make him cauterize towards the top of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as far as a thumb. Leave the cautery for as long as half of the coal is burning.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And it resembles the form of a surgeon's knife that we have shown earlier, but it is slightly more delicate and the blade should be somewhat thicker.
After treating the shoulder as I previously stated, let it heal when it is sound.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then make four cauterizations: One on each of the two forehead horns, one at the neck, and one where the arm is called "waste" as we have previously stated, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
And let it be cured as we have said before.
diarrhea (from Latin lithargyrios, meaning "stone-like")
For this disease, give the patient large iris-like seeds or round pills made of brain.
Afterward, anoint the head of the patient entirely, and place a plaster made of mustard seed or mustard treatment on the occiput (the back part of the skull).
And this is the method of cauterization: If you do it as I said.
If it is purged like this, it is good; And if it isn't, perform three fire cauterizations on the neck down to the collarbone, leaving a space of one inch between each.
and treat it as others, and if you see that it is getting better, and the patient can bear it, perform one fire cauterization; and if necessary, two more on the temples, and treat it until it is purged;
And let the cauterization called "olive" be as I said before.
The head should be purified for years and as we have said before.
After the head of the patient, then make a fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and also three on the spine of the neck.
And if needed, and the body is wet and the patient is suffering, and the illness is far advanced, make four fire cauteries on the spine of the back. and let it burn until the deeper part is seared, then remove your hand; Then treat until it heals, and the cautery called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for the phlegmatic one, and it is first necessary to clean the brain for years and other treatments as we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from thinking about taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, give a gargle and make it chew softening medicine for the brain frequently with good foods.
After the king's head in the middle, do as previously said, and apply the fire cautery on the servant, and on each horn. And if the patient is outside and suffering, apply cauterization as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and the neck, and let the cauterization be olive oil according to the method that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, apply a subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to melancholy, the superfluidities or corrupted and putrid humors produce thick phlegm, then apply cauteries with such cauterizations as we have said to those who have paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the excesses are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give them to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what was stated earlier in the division.
After the king's head of the patient. After that, make a linen tourniquet well made, like a circle, and put it on his head.
And the patient should be crosswise, and tightly bound from all sides.
After that, apply lime to the wound, using old goat's milk. And the fire must be heated moderately, so that it can be endured by the patient. After vacuuming the circle from within the head, let it cool.
And have this done to the patient once a week with good management, until he is healthy.
Or, if you wish to cauterize it, make points all over the cautery.
This method of cauterization reduces the brain significantly;
Then place wet, soft cotton on top with butter and linseed oil.
Of the eyes (lit. of the hairs) When the eyes (lit. hairs) come first according to the signs that I have said in the division, then start and give the patient something cleansing for the head, and guard it from all moisture, and let it sweat or bathe many times while fasting.
After instructing the patient to lie on his back, perform the cauterization in the head and perform two cauterizations on each temple where there is a single opening or an opening on one side only.
And apply the entire cauterization to all veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let them be long according to the width of the temple.
And beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it with your power as you can.
I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision of cautery how to apply it.
Sometimes they make a cauterization or an instrument beneath the two rear bones.
and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluidities, then do the cauterization as I said at the beginning of the work descending on the eyes. I cauterize in the head, two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations or instruments beneath the two bones. And if it is necessary more, then cauterize carefully on top of the mole with the smallest cautery.
When treating according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient three colds infusions (to drink). After the king's head (the boil), do a fire or olive oil cauterization. Do two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two moles, a little under the hair.
And beware of the artery that you do not cover it.
And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize this cautery which is called "olive oil. Of this matter are the forms:
If you see, then do two cauteries on the two moles as long as the moles are.
And don't leave the hand unless the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that pricks the oil Sometimes, the hairs of the eyelashes are converted into sweat glands and prick the eye, and then fire cautery is performed according to two methods: (This refers to) fire or burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in a safe place; after that, on top of the eyelashes, make a mark with paper like the shape of the thistle flower, and make the start of the sign along the hairs.
Then put softened cotton soaked in egg white and pepper mint oil on it, then heat the cautery according to this shape:
After heating the cautery repeatedly at the specified place, the tip should be burned.
And the signs of the success of the work are that you see the paper withdrawn and the hairs raised at the tip of the oil.
Then lower your hand, leave it like that for three days, then put softened cotton in butter until the burn is healed. After the ointment treatment until it is healed.
And if hairs grow later and the paper becomes soft, then repeat the cauterization on that same spot, just as you did before.
And if the hairs are falling out, cauterize it until the paper is raised to its natural position and is even, and do not prick the hairs with oil.
The burn cure is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a paper in the shape of the myrtle leaf.
Then take French soap and live coal, one ounce each, grind them together well; and heat it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you made like a myrtle leaf, and put the hot mixture on the hairs. and if the patient is affected only in the oil, it should be treated only there, and if in both places as well; And put cotton wool soaked in oil under an eggshell.
The patient's shoulder should be kept healthy and put your hand on top of the medication, and press the affected area and move it whenever the patient feels a bite from the medicine as it feels like a burn.
When you have made it [the patient] stay still for a long time, give him medicine to his body. And when the bite has passed, lift the affected area and observe if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constriction from fire or incision. If it is so, then it is good.
If not, replace the medication on the affected area or the medication has not worked, until your work is even and your eyes are steady.
Then place cotton wool soaked in butter on it until the blisters are healed, afterwards, apply the ointment called "diaphensis" and others until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not stick to the eyes.
If the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, then repeat the medicine on that spot which has been properly prepared, just like you did before. After it is healed;
And this is the shape of the feather of the vervain:
Know that human eyes vary in size and according to their size, this shall be your constraint.
And do not deviate from the straight path for those who are engaged in this craft.
Of the cure of fistula by cautery
When curing a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cures are not helpful, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place their head on a pillow. And hold the sick person's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or lower its head.
Then put a soft cotton cloth inside an eggshell or under parchment on the oil.
After heating the iron rod (cautery) to a certain point:
And position the head so that it forms a V shape, with the iron rod placed at the base of the V.
If you see, it should be aligned from one head to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent.
However, the position of the head as described is good for your purpose.
After opening the fistula if it is open, drain the pus, and dry it. If it is closed, then you should open it, and draw out the excrement (or perhaps 'pus' in this context).
Afterwards put the hot iron cauter on the nipple area under the oil (be careful not to burn yourself). Heat the iron cauter in the oil fat and let it rot.
If you perform the cautery right up to the bone, it would be good. If that does not work, try heating the iron cauter again if necessary, and leave it for three days.
Afterwards place damp cotton in butter and apply the drying ointment until it heals. If after forty days it is not healed, apply a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed. And the king, according to what he comes in his chapter.
And here is a method of cauterization for fistula that none of the ancients spoke of. To the fistula, make an incision and open it; After placing the camahan (substance) in the incision from this form: and they place as much as a cubit of wax; Hold your hand with the camahan firmly, and the patient must not move at all, until the wax melts and runs to its oil;
And it is necessary that you put cotton soaked in egg oil on the patient's wound.
The wax will heal the fistula and the wound by marvelous health.
If the fistula is healed by the cauterization as we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer purgatives to the nose and return the fistula to the body of the nose as required in its proper place.
cavities in lips Often cavities occur in lips, which are called "hairs," and similarly in children's lips.
When treating these cavities as mentioned in the previous section and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery spatula according to this shape:
Put it quickly into those cavities until it reaches the bottom;
After curing the shoulder of scab until it is healthy.
When pus comes to the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, after it forms a pustule and grows and becomes a fistula. And you cure it as we have said in other parts, but it does not help at all. Then it is necessary that you use the fire cautery according to the size of the fistula; After pouring or puncturing the fistula, keep your hand until the iron becomes hot at its base and at its tip.
And do it once or twice, after curing what we have said in treatments, until it is healthy.
And if it is treated in this way, it is good; If not, you must find the joint and remove the rotten bone, as per what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums become soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it is of no avail, then place the head of the sick person in your lap. After applying the heated iron, let the shape come out as it will, and you place a chain on the tooth in this manner.
Insert the heated iron quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth.
After you let go, repeat the process according to your will;
After filling the patient's mouth with salt water, let it remain for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in this manner the moving teeth are held firm and the softened gums are kept restricted, and the corrupt moisture dries out.
of the tooth pain
When toothache due to cold comes from either frostbite or fever, and the treatments with medicines are of no use, then it is necessary to apply cautery according to two methods: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
The cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and its end in an iron or copper spoon. Then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent peg, dip it in boiling butter, and place it on the painful tooth immediately and hold until it becomes cool.
And do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that wool and cotton in cold butter are moistened, place them on the diseased tooth and hold hot iron on it until the heat comes to the tip of the tooth.
The cautery combined with fire is such that you take a dog chain of iron or steel, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
After heating the cautery, its shape will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
Do this often, for the pain will be relieved that very same day or the next.
The patient must fill his mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then blow hard.
This is the shape of the cautery:
And make the cautery in any shape you want, and according to what you are able.
And this is the form of a dog:
of scrofulas When scrofula is of a cold and moist flushes, and not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the fire-cautery from what follows, and have it openings for the smoke to issue to the cautery on the other side.
And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the opening of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it thus for three days. Place dampened cotton on top until the pus is drained out.
After curing the joint of ulcers and abscesses until it is sound.
When worms attack on the channels of the womb, and particularly when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with soluble medicines.
Afterwards make the fire cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come up to the throat, and do not dare to go deep but a little bit.
Afterwards make the other fire cautery at the junction of the neck to the head of the spine, and let it be the cautery called "clavicle" from which we have the shape before.
And heal the joint as we have said before until it is sound.
When all and the disease of gout are of cold humors, and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and the disease is old, make two fire cauterizations on the forearm veins. and another cautery in the groin between the testicles;
and let the cautery called "clavicle" according to the shape as previously described be used.
And if you wish, do cautery by pricking all over the cautery called "point" as described in the disease of ears (previously);
and the points be up to 30, or within that area.
After treating the joint as previously stated, let the cautery be of three lengths according to this form:
And since the cauterizations are lighter because you do them in pairs of two.
of the shoulder dislocation
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, make the patient lie down on his back and on his side; After taking the key which is within the titillete with your left hand.
And if the jointure is dislocated within, heat the cautery which has two nerves as shown here:
And cauterize (the affected area) until it pierces through the skin, and four figures of the cautery will appear.
And thus, a cautery with three prongs is used for this purpose, because the figures of cauterization are called cauteries.
And these prongs correspond to the fineness of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery with three prongs:
And sometimes it is twisted around this nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
After placing the cautery on, break it with silk. After putting the patient to rest, let not the limbs be moved for a long time until he is well comforted.
If it is dislocated upwards, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery rod or many cauteries while pricking.
For the joint is set back in place, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When there are coldness and much moisture in the stomach that harms its constitution, and the catarrh multiplies for him, and in the usual methods of treatment it does not help; therefore the patient should lie on his back, extend his legs and hands. Then three cauteries are placed under the spoon of the scoop at the width of a thumb, the entire cautery must be clavile (driven in), and two cauteries outside each side so that the figures of the cauteries are at three angles, and with enough space between one and another that they are not joined together when they spill pus.
And let the cauteries be so sharp that they pierce both parts of the flesh, and let the figure of the cauteries be in accordance with this shape:
And if you wish to cauterize within the stomach using a large cautery in this shape:
and he who fears the cautery, cauterize by pressing and applying it on top of the stomach at the point according to the quantity you wish to burn: then cauterize completely with the cautery which is called "points".
After the treatment of the wound that we had before, let it heal when it is healthy.
When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, it is expelled from its natural condition due to excesses: and the patient is cured of what has been said earlier in the divisions, but it does not help him, and he must be attentive to his bedding: And sign the third cautery according to this form and this shape and this quantity above the liver, remove the hypochondriacs, where the cost of the ribs comes.
And there should be distance between each cautery equal to the thickness of a thumb. And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press too hard with your hand on all the cauteries.
And only burn half of the ear, and let the patient lie straight on his feet.
If he cannot, then let him lie down, extend his legs, and lift his arms.
If you wish, you can perform these cauteries with the scalpel, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn too deeply, for you will singe all of the body. And it shall not reach boiling, for the herb is very subtle in that place, and the wise can see it.
When you have an abscess in the liver, and you want to know whether it is within the liver's flesh or its membrane. If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not very strong;
And if it is in the membrane, it feels intense pain.
And when this treatment ceases for the patient, it is necessary that he be on guard over his head;
and then hold down the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a flat iron, as shown in this figure: Heat the cautery until the corners are burning, and come up to where the pus is, so that it can be completely removed;
After the treatment according to the treatment of abscesses until it heals;
And this cautery should not be used by anyone without extensive study in the art of medicine, for many times these diseases have been aggravated by it.
Then he can operate boldly, but I think it is better to wait a little longer.
the cautery for pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make cauterizations for pleurisy with roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest one you can find, and it should be dry, and as thick and long as your thumb. and wet the root in oil, heat it on fire, and cauterize the cautery between the armpit and neck, and apply a few small cauteries downwards in the area below the beard.
and the cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining slightly behind. and the cautery on the side of the hip, and the other one above the stomach, and the one between the shoulders, and the two cauteries on each side away from the cautery that is between the shoulders.
And do not press your hand forcefully, but open it gently as when sniffing.
And an old man said that anyone using the fire-cautery resembles a razor, and they heat it and put it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess. And then the pain jumps wildly, as we said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mice, that is as we have said in the division of cures and it does not help at all, then apply three ways of cautery, all good.
Of these methods, it is that you make three or four cauterizations in a line according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver-cautery that we have said before.
And do not press your hand on the entire cauterization, and let the patient be aware of his back.
And another way of cautery is that you heat the cauter iron with two prongs, as shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
And lift the iron that is near the mouse, where the pain of the patient comes towards the left side, and raise the elevations from which you heat the iron according to the length of the body, and the cauter iron according to the width of the body.
After placing the two prongs heated together until the iron is pierced on the other side, then pull the cauter iron away, and in this way there will be four.
And if you wish to cauterize with all of the cautery using three prongs.
After treatment when he has had pus for long time, and it is worth applying the other remedies mentioned before.
Cautery is not effective against dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
When the treatment according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the wound, one above the stomach, one above the liver, one above the mouse, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the site of pain. And let the cautery be close to the swelling of the sore.
After open (the wound) for a long time and let it purge pus, but do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery. And healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the crucible that we have previously shown. And for the back it should be olive-shaped, as described earlier.
When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are full of hot liquid, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; hold your hand with the cautery without turning it.
And do not go too deep, otherwise the citrine would be forceful; and make sure the cautery is in this shape:
After doing two cauteries on each leg at the point of the knife blade; and let the cauterized area be long, one under the knee in front and the other outside, within the leg;
And let the cauteries heal over time on their own, for it heals them.
after the healing of other treatments that we have mentioned.
When the abdominal distention comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and restorative powers which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened and cannot be healed by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, make a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned earlier, or stomach cauterization, around the stomach. and three subtle cauteries around the navel, at every cautery joint, and two cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, apply cautery on the joint, one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries on the stomach in addition to the large one, because the cure is beneficial where there is good aid.
of the cure for hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are deeply rooted, single or multiple, and are old, filled with large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we have said in the previous section, and it does not help, then apply fire cauteries. On the spine of the back, that which is completely dislocated under the occipital bone and moves triangularly, the fire cautery should be applied beneath the buttock.
If you suspect that the stomach is cooled and meat does not cook, and swelling of the face is seen, then the great fire cautery should be applied on the stomach as previously mentioned, and another one on the liver, and another one on the spleen with a full-length cautery. And let the fire cautery remain open for a long time. After healing the joint when it is healthy.
When you treat athlete's foot, if the fire cautery seems to be a razor, then heat it and place it on top of the athlete's foot so treated. and let your hand be such that the cautery comes to the opening of the vein, so that it does not cut.
Do this once or twice, and if there is much athlete's foot, then cauterize each one as we have said. After the cures of ointments are beneficial until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on scrofula (a chronic inflammatory disease), it will have more help.
If the patient cannot bear incision or opening, which we will explain in its place, this disease comes that can only be healed by cauterization.
If any abscess comes, and it is swollen, rotten, and corrupted with moisture, you should probe the whole cavity with a subtle needle, and ensure that you know exactly how deep the hole goes.
After heating the cautery that seems like a razor, and pushing it into the fistula according to how much it was entered, start the cauterization until the body parts become burned and corrupted, once, or II or III times, according to the amount of soreness required.
And beware of burning the nerve that is within, and the great veins.
if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, beware of these places, and do not act carelessly except in a charcoal fire, and think that it is not useless.
after curing the place until it is clean, and if the places are purulent and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely clean.
And if the tissues are not removed, know that the joint is broken, and the bone is corrupt. And as one of these whom we will describe in his place.
When cold pain comes at the joints and from large wind, and does not respond to female remedies, then you must make a fire cautery on both sides of the joints with the claw-shaped fire cautery as we have previously said.
And if we perform the cauterization in the middle, it will have three cauterizations in a row, and they will be more helpful.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then you make a cauterization on the outside of the bladder where the pubic hair begins, both on the right and left side, and each cauterization should be as long as one's thumb.
And make the fire cautery outside the back, where it is needed.
and let the fire cautery be attached in the shape mentioned above.
When the matrix is cold and moist, it does not allow conception to take place, and the flowers are corrupt and their terms are delayed. and when they come, there is great pain. Then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the abdomen, as we have said in the bladder cautery and one cautery outside the back.
and let the cauteries be attached, as we have said.
When the moist thickeners descend into the haunch of the thigh, and for this reason it moves from its place, the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
And the joints to be treated should be found in the affected limb, so you must apply the fire cautery on the patient over the swelling area, similar to a circle, and position yourself before the joint around the swelling, as it turns, so that the swelling is inside the circle;
And the cautery should be similar to those used for stomach cauterization.
And if this type of cautery is not present, make three olive-sized large cauteries and ensure they are as sharp as all the others;
Cure it until it becomes healthy.
of the pain of the hernia When pain occurs in the swelling area, and it is due to cold and moisture, the patient is cured of this as we have said in the division, but the illness remains; Therefore, it is necessary to purge the patient of large humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good-looking pills. After performing the fire cautery:
And the method of the cautery is according to two methods: (This means) It is to be known together with burning medicines and the fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which one is such:
You shall cauterize on the boil of the buttock with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make good depth and large, and have space between each cautery the thickness of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped.
Sometimes they make a cauterization in the middle on the buttock's head, so there are four according to this shape.
And if you see, if you cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the buttock.
But do it in this manner so that the circles encompass the entire buttock, and all its edges are burned.
And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when the pain remains in the lower back, and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg.
And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says that the pain is, and the fourth cautery above the ankle four fingers wide, on the left side a little.
And let the cautery be the cutting tool, and heat the thickness of the coal.
And if the patient feels that pain spreads to the chest or near there, cauterize it at the place where he feels pain with a lance three or four fingers deep, which is called "poins". And if necessary, make more.
And if it is known that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, perform a cautery using the cutting or circular lance; and take great care in all your cauteries to not let the cauterize too deeply so as not to burn the nerves and large arteries, and to do no greater harm or contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have performed a fire cautery on the heel of the foot, and they let it become swollen completely, both the leg and the feet, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted. After a belly solution where death occurred.
And if the pain is in two parts together, perform a fire cautery on one and the other, according to this method.
And the sage (wise man) said in the cautery of the hainche (possibly referring to a part or disease), here is the method, make the iron similar to a small nail of the finger, or slightly smaller, and it should be cross-shaped or made from one crosspiece to another of a distance equal to the size of a nut of the thumb;
and let the crosspieces be above each other, and also like nuts, and have the iron piece well made.
and this is the shape:
And let it be heated until it is all red and glowing hot, and then place it on the box of the sick hainche (part or disease), and turn it towards the healthy side.
And the cautery once applied, let it heal for three days. Then apply a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time. After the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Al-Bukassim says that we should not use this caution too much due to fear of its gaze, and few people use it.
And yet, this is a good cautery, which can be endured by the strong, and there where it adheres.
The medical cautery is such that you make the instrument between the joints in this way, by cutting through the margin of the door, and it should be of iron or steel with a long handle, and at the top have two notches, and between each one the width of the size of a thumb. And they shall be open and above, and join together as shown in this form:
Place the bed of the backbone on the patient lying on his side, and then your hand a little above the bed of the backbone; After casting between the two circles of hot iron heated in the firepot, and leave it for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and the burn from it.
For it penetrates bite-like, just like fire;
And when the biting has passed, put your hand with the instrument and gently lift the backbone from its socket, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter so that the blackness of the burn is removed; And let it rest for three days until purulence comes out of it.
and this would be the last help after the treatment of sores, as long as they are healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument to bind it according to what you have done in the haunch properly.
And this is the method for hot bandages, and I have written or explained how to correct medicine. Take alkali and hot live coal, as much of one as of the other, grind them together and put in a new pot. or if it has a small opening that the point of a lance can enter into.
or if it has a small opening that the point of a lance can enter into. and put one pot on top of the other well filled, and put alkaline and salt and soft bandages on top, until there are two fingers' distance above the powders when you have firmly pressed it with your hand.
And let it remain like that until it dries and contracts or breaks open, then take all of that pus, and throw it onto lime and alkaline as before.
And when it has become very sore and is treated with various medicinal work and other cauteries for the limbs.
For it works like fire, and when treated with other medicines from which the inflammation is cauterized well, such as wax, tallow, honey, almonds, lime with soap, all mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure in which a man was cured from pain in the back and sciatic vein, and he praised it much, and said that no other cure was made for it, and that he became healthy once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as indicated below.
And say thus: you take green powdered litharge (lime) and crush it very finely with a little fat, and place it on the inflammation and on the thigh and leg where the pain is, and let it stay.
And let it [the patient] rest for 3 hours, and in this time the patient no longer feels the burn.
Then make him enter or bathe until his body is slightly warmed, and have him lie down, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use such fire cautery as medicine unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is burned with goat's-beard, it helps much;
and the cautery should be done in this manner. Take linen and anoint it with old oil, and put it on the furrow that is between the little toe of the foot and the one called the cubital fossa.
Take dry goat's-beard, heat it until it becomes coals, and place it on wool, and let it remain until it is cool.
And do this again and continue to do so until you think by your senses that it has reached the hymen and the pain is stopped.
And this method of cautery is called "goat's-beard cautery".
Of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, either by falling or impact or excessive evacuation, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these resemble cauteries unless for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary afterwards that the patient be emptied of fetid pills or similar things, which are placed on the back, where the pain is felt, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line V cauteries, or more according to the power and quantity that the patient can endure.
and be done the cautery according to the cautery which is called "points".
and if you see, do III or IV cauteries or IV at the cautery with an average shape according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrow anus when they strain, and fear. and you find in the lower spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this form. The cautery causes each part of the spine to enlarge.
And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointing two or three lines, and let the tips be close to each other.
After curing the joint until it is healthy, according to what we have said, beware not to administer the cautery in a lump that might be within a nerve.
of the pain in the joints
When pains in the joints are due to swellings that affect every member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which are called "gout" properly, and when it is caused by coldness and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this way:
make the patient hold a hot iron around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary to prick the abdomen, then the entire cautery is applied like "the point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, make one or two cauteries on each part of the knee, with an olive-shaped cautery for each.
and if you need more, then do more, but don't hold your hand away from the heated iron more than necessary.
And if the pains descend to the genitals and back, administer the fire cautery as we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are at the hands, make points around the wrist two lines.
If there remains a point of pain in the fingers, make points above each joint and above the hair on the hand.
And if the pains come as far as elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part and make good care of the patient and consider medications.
For if you take good care of him and purge pus, he will be saved with God's help.
When rot is coming in wounds and the boils descend to the joints and it is new, it is necessary that when you see it to cure, that he does not eat anything on that day. and that he uses things that relieve the stomach, so that the phlegm descends from his stomach.
Afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the boils are healing, and you bind it with your fingers, and press down over the roture on the bone of the elbow, and at every sign that is similar to half a circle above the chest.
Then heat the fire cautery with this form:
until it is white and gives off a smell. Then heat the iron rods at their place; and the assistant touches his hand so that he does not return backwards.
and work well the thighs on the patient, put a cushion under him and a sergeant on his thighs, and another on the bed that supports his hands.
then place the cautery on the spot with your whole hand, hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you reach the bone. be careful that the patient does not move when you perform the cautery. do not burn him; So that the patient does not die or suffer further harm.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And the fire cauteries for children should be fine-tuned according to their size, and the same goes for adults according to theirs.
After three days of care, the leach from the fire cautery should be removed when the burn is healed.
After treating with other medicaments until it is healthy, and the patient lies on his back for forty days so that the wound heals well.
And it is necessary to let him rest for a long time so that the swellings do not protrude when he gets up to go into rooms.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, they should prepare a bandage well and keep it for forty more days.
And have good rest, let him work little and watch against excessive drinking and eating, and excessive shouting.
And when he follows this teaching, he becomes entirely healthy.
And here I shall tell you about the treatment of amputation in its chapter.
When roundworms appear in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow further, then perform the cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third part of the liver. After the cure, as we have said.
And none of the ancients said it should be cauterized at the cautery with three corners according to this form:
However, mark first the location of the beginning and make a line above the boil, and another below it, and then place your hand on the entire cautery handle.
But the initial cauterizations are lighter and more mobile.
of old pain in any member When pain comes in any limb, either from falling or being injured, and that pain lasts for a long time, and the medicines used do not help, it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its nature and location of twisting and of its pain.
if he is healthy from the first cautery, that's good.
If this name recurs for another cautery upon that one, because custom is that it should change in the limb that is near, therefore you must perform the cauteries as long as the patient remains ill.
The illness is sometimes helped by cautery with great help, and the same applies to those who come from the rotting of phlegm and melancholy.
Can you see the patient to be cauterized, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither it bleeds nor remains, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then perform V cautery on the head. I place one hand on the head and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairs. The first is placed on the temples, and the second behind the ears.
Keep your hand so that the cautery comes to the bone and so that the bark bursts out through it so that the vapors of the large humors can escape.
And cauterize the mice according to what is before [you].
And if the fracture is scattered everywhere; and it becomes manifest, then you must apply these cauterizations as we have said before, namely the cautery on the neck, the cautery on the spine of the neck, the six cauteries on the spine of the back, the large one on the shinbone and the other below it, and two cauteries on each shoulder; And he shall stretch out the muscles, and he shall stretch out the tendons with the rod, and he shall stretch each joint of the hands and feet, and the hollows of the hands.
And protect the nerves that are above the last bone in the foot, that you not burn them;
Sometimes make an incision on the bone of the fist, and another one on the bone of the stomach, and another one on the liver.
And know that when you do more cauterizations, you do more good, and it benefits him more.
And know that the patient feels no pain during the cauterization as the body is already entirely corrupt.
And the cautery should be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the manners of irons.
After curing the shoulder with flour and honey and other remedies until it is purified.
When swelling appears in any member and is treated with medicine, oil, and plasters, and it is not cured, then cauterize the member according to the size and smallness of the member.
And let the cautery be a small opening in the thick part of the flesh; then heal with ointments until it is healed.
Sometimes they make a cautery at the hand, foot, and back, to the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and in this way the tumor is removed;
and no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the paths of moving nerves in the body;
When the disease called "albaras" is evident, and the remedies of medicine are worth nothing, then cauterize with a deep cautery until the inflammation disappears, and the color becomes normal;
Then cook (or prepare) flour of wheat and lentils with rose oil and banana leaves, as well as the blood of a cat and the blood of a crane, each one in equal parts. And let it be mixed together completely, tie it up in a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
They cure scrofula (scrofula is a term for a chronic skin disease, often associated with tuberculosis) through cautery.
When a boil appears at the beginning, and you wish to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that resembles a circle around the boil.
However, the wise men also say that a fire cautery should be performed in the middle of the abscess.
However, this does not seem good to me, as I fear that it will become an ulcer and corrupt, and I have seen it happen once.
And the more appropriate thing is that it be cauterized around (the abscess), with the cautery called "circular", as we have said in the discussion about cauteries.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it delays healing or because of the excess it causes, or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (meaning very old), and there is little blood, or due to the time. and you see it hastened to heal: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking. afterwards leave it in that state. When it will hasten to heal. (Continuing from the previous translation)
And if you see it pierced through entirely with the fire cautery, heat the cautery as follows:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" while the cauteries have pierced through the core, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them outside to such an extent that the course of the pus is alleviated.
After curing completely when he is perfectly healthy.
Another kind of disease is called "corrosion," and it is nothing other than a rot of the member, because it consumes limbs as fire dries up dry wood.
If you see this disease in a place that can bear cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries slightly small and large according to what is required for the location or the disease.
afterwards cauterize it all over until you reach all the corruption and nothing remains of it, so that everything corrupt should be excised.
And then leave it for three days and put on the affected areas soft powder made with oil until burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the treatment of ointments causing heat.
And if after three days you see no pus healthy, it is good;
and if not, resume the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted joints.
And this lancet has sometimes been cured with medicinal juice instead of fire cautery.
nevertheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure for medicinal juice in the division: take it when you need it.
The hairs which come to the feet Often, through the foot, a disease called "clog" arises according to our understanding, which is a large thing that bites at the foot.
And the cauteries for this disease are in two ways. This is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Fire cautery is heated like a feather from a ploughshare, and should be made of good iron to the extent that it can penetrate through all parts, and that its edges are thin.
Place it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it reaches the base of the nail. Leave it in this way for three days until it begins to emit pus. Then make a poultice of wild herbs boiled with oil and leave it on all night; the nail will shrink and be uprooted from its roots.
Then heal the joint with a soothing ointment until it is healthy.
And if it is converted by foreign matter, and often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply hot cautery. It proceeds like this: Take a cable of iron or wood, or a pin of lead, and place it on the nail and the anvil, that is, to pierce warts. and place the cable above so that it goes all around, then put some hot paste there and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cable comes to the root of the nail, and let the hot paste find its way deeply to the root.
make the patient endure the bite of the hot paste for an hour; then leave it like that and it will fall out with all its roots.
Similarly, do as you did before, until you scorch all those within the body; then heal the burns that cause pain.
If someone trembles due to cold or nerves, or from quarter fever or something else, you must do four fire cauterizations or four on the spine of the back, one between each spine. And for the fire cautery, use it on the foot or on the stomach with an olive oil cauterization.
If he lets it tremble and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
Sometimes, boils or putrid pustules appear on the body due to corrupt large matter.
It is necessary at first when they appear, that a cautery be made over each head of the pustule: A subtle cautery made from myrtle staff, so that the point is seized by fire, or of the long root of Aristolochia, or with a cauterizing plier.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they cannot grow further, but the excess is torn off that comes from them, and they heal.
But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Often there are great movements of blood from the artery which is cut at the wound that reaches the outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or to the cautery of a member, and similar things. And it is a very bad thing to dislocate [something].
Furthermore, when this happens to someone, quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press it as hard as possible until the blood stops flowing.
Then apply the olive oil-filled fire cautery, both small and large, until they are all red.
Then take, whether large or small depending on the wound and the location in which the artery runs, and place the cautery on that vein where your finger is, and hold the cautery there until the blood clots.
And if a jump occurs when you place your finger on the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauteries that are near the fire.
And continue to do this one after the other until the blood stops flowing.
And beware not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and no other harm comes upon the patient.
And learn that when the artery is not cut through, it cannot be properly bandaged up if the artery is large, unless it's by one of the four ways we have mentioned. or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tightly tying thread, or by medicines applied that have the power to stop bleeding. and bind and tighten accordingly.
Whoever applies tight bandages or places hot substances on it, or similar things, will not benefit if the above method does not help.
And if this happens and there is no mirror or medicine present, he should put his finger on the wound as we have said, and stretch it out accordingly until it stops bleeding over the wound and the vein. And it should not move, but the cold dampness should often be cooled very much until the wound is frozen and swollen and hardened.
Make inquiries about what remedies and medications are needed for this case.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases where it is necessary to use a hot cautery or medication, and we examine the eyes, causes, instruments, forms of the cauteries.
And I have placed that chapter on the head to the feet, and I will go through this chapter in the same way because it is easier to find what we are looking for.
And as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things. There is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you to not undertake foolishness. For many ways of people come in the treatment. Those who suffer such illnesses and die quickly due to the madness caused by their disease and the great severity of their condition. and one should fear such things.
And among these there are those who entrust their senses to you, and say: "Attend, I am cured. and the illness is deceitful.
You should not easily trust those who come to you with this mannerism, but put more weight on your honor than your desire, and do not rashly believe but wisely from those about whom you are certain, and from which you can take and learn.
And make use of prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients, so that health may be attained.
And this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Dearest son, may our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Moreover, I have organized this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have previously discussed from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand those things that you may need.
Note that this illness often comes upon children during birth, and when the head of the child is forced too tightly.
Sometimes it comes from causes that are not known.
I have never seen this illness outside of children, and the death hastens for all those that I have seen. And because of this, it seems to me that I should be less active in these treatments.
And I saw an infant whose shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger every day until it could no longer support.
And the moisture spread so much that he was dead, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the syphilis, between the cartilage and the bone.
And the work is such that if there is moisture between the cartilage and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a wide incision near the head.
And let it be as long as ours, until the moisture runs out.
Look here is the shape of the probe (spatula):
If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscesses are larger, make two incisions in the form of a cross, as follows:
If the moisture is under the bone and you see the signs that the head is opened on both sides, and it forms a sharp crack when you press with your hand from inside, then it has not healed. It is necessary that you make three cuts in the middle of the head in this manner:
And after the incision, remove all moisture. After binding the cuts with linen and powders, put vinegar and oil on them and leave them like that for five days;
Then unbind it and cure the wound with lancing and ointments, let the head swell up, and give the patient dry meat from a damp place to eat until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you look where the abscess is large, and where the liquid collects;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes it is behind; sometimes on the right side; And sometimes to the left.
Therefore, make an incision where the abscess is and empty the pus, and do as you can with it.
And beware not to cover the artery. And if there comes blood, let the patient die in a seemly manner through bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
When a disease called "catarrh" affects any of the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and the medicine's cure does not help at all, then the last cure is the cautery with which two arteries will be touched.
Therefore, when you wish to cover [something], have the patient bend his head backwards. After rubbing the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then tighten the patient's neck with the cloth. Then look where the vein is biting, and the left and right sides are behind the ears, and the hands should be placed.
Then mark the joints with a cross, then strike both with a sharp spatula of two parts, until the cut reaches the bone, and this should be done at the wide part of the joint.
And if you see (it), push the spatula beneath the artery and strike it from above, cutting as deeply as two fingers' width.
When the vein is cut, it jumps out without ceasing continuously upward.
And if the arteries do not open to the touch, then you must measure the space of three fingers, then mark and cut up to the bone.
And it is necessary to forcefully put out the blood which is 6 cubits, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery.
then observe the wound: If it remains on the bone close to the skin and the abscess does not burst open, then hold and bind the wound and treat with ointment until it is healed.
From migration When the old migraine comes with a sharp catarrh, due to moisture in the eyes and heat in the temples and ancient forsenee and similar things, and it is treated with medicines and cures, but none of them help, we should cut open the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have said.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient bends the hair on his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is easily found except in some men who are too cold.
and if it is found to be in place, the patient pulls his neck with some cloth, then rubs the area with rough fabric, and washes the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly. then take the spatula as follows: then gently scrape the skin until you see the artery, then pull it up towards the prongs and separate well the fabrics from both sides.
And if the arteries are thin, turn it to the point of the incisor, then strike that part according to the size of the two cheeks. If it is not cut, it will not heal at all.
And drain blood from the six veins down to three.
And if the arteries are large, you must tie it with two strong silk threads, one at each side of the wound, for pus not to come before the stitching of the wound and bleeding stops.
Then strike the excess that is between the two ligatures in the same hour itself, and if you see fit, cauterize with a surgical knife as far as the bone until the shoulders are separated.
And this is the mature work, if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot constitution. The cautery (or burning tool) is aid for curing moisture: it is of greater aid to those suffering from moisture.
For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the cavity with old cotton and put it firmly in place;
and when they are loosened, you should treat them with dry medicines that cause heat, and with bandages until it is healed.
and if the artery is not sealed as you work on it, hurry to cover it with cautionery (or burning tool), or fill the cavity with vitriol (a chemical substance) and hold your hand over it so that the wound does not become infected. and if you do not have that, place your finger over the wound until it freezes, then rub the wound with cold water until it stops, and hold it as necessary.
And between the two blades there should be a space of that size, and then when you have closed the two sides, and you hold the fire burning until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places. And they should be separated between the two shoulders, because it is not welded by this fire cautery altogether.
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And the one who is moved and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery, but the incision should be well thickened to keep its heat for a longer time. For when the instrument is too thin, it retains less heat.
Tears When the eyes of the hairs are flowing from the veins that are above the head of fire, and it does not benefit by medicine when one performs it, and you see the patient's face turn red, and you see his forehead shake like a shudder. and if they are tender and moist so that the hairs of paper are falling out, and the papery flesh is burnt, and scorched by the heat of tears, this treatment is required. And they called it by the ancients "contused cure", and is that you make at the back of the patient who has this disease the hairs on his forehead, then you make three cuts evenly along the length of the forehead.
And they called it by the ancients "contused cure", and is that you make at the back of the patient who has this disease the hairs on his forehead, then you make three cuts evenly along the length of the forehead. And one of the fissures (should be) similar to the way it should move the entire forehead forward by swallowing downwards up to the nose, and the others will be in the chest through the papers above, and keep yourself from incising the arteries that are above the papers.
And hold your hand away from the continuation of both jaws, and each wound should be of the size of three fingers joined together.
and prepare a piece of sponge and a lot of cloth for wiping the blood, then insert the sharpened spatula of two parts as shown here.
from the incision which is below the temple up to the second incision. and cut out all the fat that is between the two fissures to its entire length, which is above the bone, then continue from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this sharpened spatula. insert the instrument called "culter" (which is pointed on one side and soft, not pointed, and its shape is:)
And cut the bone obliquely towards the skin according to your knowledge, and the bone is soft towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the mid-incision.
And cut all the eyelashes that descend from the head until the incision is continuous up to where the opening of the eyeball appears, and then further proceed in the middle split up to the other eyelid.
Then draw equal amounts of blood and press on the place where the blood was taken.
then put a tent of old cotton in each split and place damp cloths soaked in wine, oil and vinegar on top, and ensure that pus does not come.
and on the third day loosen the ligature, and bring a strong plant of cold water, then apply a basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
When someone commonly comes with an acute catarrh, and you see the eyes becoming swollen and small, and clouding vision, and burned papers. And the hair falls out, and if one presses on the head in pain, and the patient coughs. Therefore, learn through these symptoms that those matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the medicine to be used for it, if it is there, should be applied.
And you shall tell the patient to bend his head back, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another wide one in the cheek. And begin at the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating.
and when the bone is exposed, drain all the blood with a sponge, then loosen between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton and linen thread. Then lay above it cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep away from getting hot.
When it is removed (a tumor or foreign body), you should rub the bone until tender flesh begins to grow, then heal with drying agents that promote healing.
In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster with them. And apply it to these wounds to stop the pain everywhere.
ear stoppage (stopping/blockage of the ears)
Everything that falls in ears is one of the four things: or grain, or beast, or stone from the mine, or similar things like iron. or seeds, such as peas, beans, lentils. or something flowing, such as water and oil and similar things.
When it falls into the ear stone or another thing that does not fit into the ear, does not lie in the ear, place the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, distill some purple oil or camphor oil, then apply extraction. And you make him cough with condys, and stop his nostrils when coughing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool. And stretch the ear upward.
Many times comes fever due to this treatment.
And if it does not come with fever, bring about the extraction of small tweezers, here is the form for it:
If it leaps with tweezers, that is good.
if not, bring about the extraction of an onion-shaped fine probe of small thickness.
and if it does not leap with that, make a bee-shaped cane and push the head of the cane or ear perforation strongly, and stop the one who is around the cane with wax so that air cannot enter with the cane. then draw it out in form, for many times comes fever as we have said.
And if it does not come forth in such a manner, it takes glue from what it takes the birds, and puts on some instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and puts a little cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out.
And if it does not jump out of all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear so that pus comes in and it spasms;
and the method of cutting is that you make the patient first drain the head, and draw out the blood according to the measure of its strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear where the fat or flesh depends; And make the cut as round as a moon until you reach the bone, then break it according to your strength, and suck out the juice quickly with your mouth.
And heal it while it is still draining pus.
And if there are grains (pus) swelling up, administer extraction (incision or lancing).
And if it cannot drain, apply a thin, subtle sponge according to this form: make an incision of that grains.
But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist due to ear moisture, as long as you have made many cuts.
Then take out with fine forceps and suction, as we have said, so that the extractions align.
In water that falls into the ear, the patient should use warm gargles of first remedies, and fill the ear with large cotton. And let him lie on that same ear itself where the water is. If it jumps out because of that, it's good. (This line refers to the cotton in the ear staying in place.)
if this is not done, take many stones according to the length of your thumb and light, and heat them slightly with fire. and place the patient or wounded person with his ear, and boil water on one side of it. From the other side, take another stone and strike the stone in the ear with it. and do not stop hitting one stone against the other until the water boils completely out, and then it will burst out.
And if you see, grab the string, and push one of the shoulders into the ear, and take hold of the other head with fire until the more tender joint is burned;
then straighten the joints of the other limbs until the pain subsides completely, as we have said in the previous section.
In the extraction of the beast, if it has a small body, like a flea and similar creatures, treat it as we have said in the classification;
but if it has a large body that can be felt, bring forth the extraction of tweezers; and it is the lighter things to remove that are in the ear.
In the removal of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the classification and the treatment of distillation, and the treatment does not help, then you must observe the ear in the sun; If there are any openings (wounds), draw them shut with fine forceps if they do not close by themselves. And if they do not open, take the cord that is in the form mentioned here:
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And put the smaller plier (tweezers) in the ear according to the amount of pain the patient has, then press firmly on the cord. Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey to come out, stop the cord of cotton around it as I said before.
And if they do not come out as we said before, administer distillations that the ancients have proved to be effective in the treatment of worms. You will find it or how to treat with distillations.
And if you distill your oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, here is its form as you see: The lower part should be of silver or brass, narrow and pointed, with a cover above for distilling.
And for pressing within the distillation, use an instrument made of brass that is suitable, and if you see, take the scraper and wrap it around the tip with cotton. Then pour your oil or juice into the canal, and whatever you see of your medicines in the ear.
Then push the scraper into the cotton and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or the ear moves. And the patient feels pain within, and it should be distilled [treated] with fire in the same way as it is distilled in the ear. And ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be as good.
ear stoppage (stopping/blockage of the ears)
No child is born without some deformity in the ears.
And this same thing happens in men by the stoppage of a wound or pus born within the ear, and sometimes it comes all the way into the ear if one cannot see it.
And sometimes the deformity turns outwards, and one can see it well.
Therefore, if it comes all the way into the ear and one cannot see it, it is a difficult cure in many ways, and in this case you must place the sick person's ear in the sun. And look within: If you see the opening apparent, perform entirely this spatula of which form is given here:
And be sharp and cutting both in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear.
If the opening is from cartilage or corrosion of the ear, hold it with subtle tweezers and strike gently until all the cartilage is removed.
And if the tumor has invaded fully into the ear, take a sharp, thin scissors and heat it slightly in fire, then insert it into the ear canal.
If you feel an opening that causes the patient pain in the ear, make a gentle puncture and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
Then place a wick in the ear according to the size of the wound and moist it with the Egyptian ointment. Apply this every day until the wound heals, or take a linen cloth and moisten it in strong vinegar, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on top of it.
And if you see an ear swelling, then you should pull the linen cloth away and move another linen cloth moistened with rose oil and beeswax until the swelling is removed. Then heal it until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other treatments to stop the bleeding which are either cauterization or distillation treatments.
This is the treatment for blisters that come in paper when they are moist and dry. Then you should stretch them with pliers and forceps, and scrape them from their roots with a spatula. Then put broken vitriol on it.
And if [the patient] does not cut it open, the cautery with the fine lenticular cautery should be used, and after the incision is made, the cauterization is beneficial.
And many times they repair themselves, but nothing remains of their roots. and when they are cauterized by fire, the roots are burned and they do not return.
Of the hail (meaning "hardened lumps under the skin") Many times come in paper from the eyes something that appears like hail in its shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "hail", and it is a thick accumulation of moisture in the upper and lower paper (eye). The works are such:
The works are such: Take care if the swelling remains silent from both sides, it is an easy thing to know.
Then (you) open (it), next, peel the skin from both sides lightly, then take it with the forceps and crush it.
if you cannot crush it without piercing a little paper, do not worry the patient.
and if the wound is large, join it with stitches and cure it until it heals.
and if it is small, do not apply force, for the oil will restore it soon and add heat to the wound.
If the swelling is descending within the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, hold the swelling with forceps and crush and press it from both sides.
And if the paper is dislocated by an incision, it causes no harm.
And when the hail is struck, boil oil of brackish water, and heal the wound of those who are injured by the hail until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the hairs Exinach is a grease that is injured in the skin of papers above, and this happens more often with children than with adults, and it causes them great discomfort, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear to look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes.
And because of this, they lie on their faces immediately and sleep on them, and their papers are wet under their eyelids with the exinach that has spread in the oil. And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel something exit between them.
And the manner of work is that the patient places their head on a pillow;
then take the linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the size that contains external pus from each part, then place it over [the affected area]; and press with your hands on both sides so that the pus is collected in the circle;
then make a hole in the moisture with the narrow lancet, and it should not be larger than the wound made during vein opening.
and cut the skin completely so that you can see the pus; and in various positions, pus comes out of the hole, according to the shape of a white lard piece.
Take then a single piece of coarse cloth between your hands and spread it out; turn your hand from right to left until it is spread out.
and ensure that you do not add anything in the slit, that you do not bring the spatula to the oil or pierce it.
And if the dislocation does not open at the beginning of the slit, raise the slit slightly so that it opens.
Then reset it as we have said, then wet cloths in oil and water, and put them on the joint, and hold with bandages.
And if such men who grind linen and put it on top to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then heal it until it is healed.
And if an abscess hot to the joint comes, then heal it with plasters soothing until it is healed.
hair from paper When paper-like growths grow with hairs, other than their nature, and are nourished, they harm the eyes and bring on diseases such as regular weeping and softening of the paper-like growths and albumin, to the point that it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes.
And the cure is according to four ways: or by cautery with fire, or by cold medication as described in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by canines, as I will explain.
You must put the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of oil on your left hand;
if it is turned over, that's good; if not, push an awl through it completely; and cut off the edge of the paper where the hairs emerge from those hairs, pull the thread above it all over the paper, and turn to the razor;
then make an incision in the part under the paper, beneath the hairs, all the way along the spatula from the large tear to the small one;
Then draw the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and linen beneath the paper, then mark on the paper a shape like a thistle stalk, and it is necessary that the figure should be according to the size that you see the paper should be raised.
And if there is need for a large amount of paper according to how much the paper has been softened;
then make the whole stylus on the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large notch down to the small one; and let it be one of the slits near the natural hairs at the thickness of a root, then push the onion into one of the two angles of the keyhole, then peel it entirely;
Then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle and fine linen thread, squeeze out the blood, and make the excess thread adhere to the two eyelids to any gluey substance, if you want to do this.
and if not, if you have no treatment for it, then leave the stitch and the thread until three or four days.
then treat the wound without stitching with drying and constricting substances, for the paper relieves at the edge of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitch is rotten (as they say in the olden days), and this is not work done with fear. and if another way:
and if another way: And it is that you trace the paper with a figure like the fennel stalk, as we have stated, divided into three sections according to the form given here:
Then fold what is above the small areas equally according to the shape shown below:
And if you cannot hold the tongs and the thing is not even, take a needle with thread on it and pierce through the figure. and put the other thread from the large notch, and the second thread from the small one, and arrange the threads equally between your fingers.
then flatten your hand equally and lift all the skin that you have signed, as we have stated, then sew together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and let it heal until it is healthy.
And if an abscess comes to your incision, appease it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
Occasionally the hairs of the papier become converted:
If you must perform an incision, use what we have said about it.
However, the stitching in one and the other is more artful.
The treatment of dogs follows this form: and it is that you convert the papier and fold it inside as I have said, and then make two dogs by art, and two fine strings as long as the papier and the width of the spatula. and tie together the heads of the two parts where you hold the threads;
Then assemble one and the other gently on top of what is covered by the paper of oil, and hold the two cords of the two parts together. And leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is held will die and rot and fall off, as it decays through it.
If it takes too long, if necessary, heal it until it heals completely.
When the wound is healed, and when the paper is lifted, the hairs will not grow again;
And this is the form of the two cords that you will make according to this figure and this quantity of length and width:
The work requires taking a thin needle and putting silk thread on it that is also thin. Then gather the bones [shoulder] and bring them together gently, and may the thickness of the tendons be a palm's length.
then wind a thin thread of silk briefly around [the shoulder] and bind it with the thread.
then put the patient's head on a clean pillow.
and let the patient's head be removed from the sun so that the work is clear, for this is a subtle and delicate work, then insert the needle into the entire socket towards the root of the hair, and make it pierce through the paper quickly until you draw it over the natural hair.
then pull out the hair up to the socket and insert into the socket the number of hairs, whether one or two or three or more.
Then stretch your hand until the hairs come out completely from all the chase on the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out, you will pull the chase beneath to the thread that you have prepared, until the chase comes out from the holes above and you see it through the eye of oil.
Then you will pull the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it for 2 or 3 days until the hair adheres in its place and the flesh grows up.
And if the hairs are small, accompany it with long natural hair and let it grow along with that which you leave, until it is stretched out and then remove it.
Of the corruption of the oil When this disease called "alecrati" or porridge comes in the eye, it has two ways:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly due to a wound or injury, or by similar things.
And the method of treatment is that you break the adhesion, separate the eyelids from it, put linen threads inside, and hold it until it heals.
and it must not be that you use in its treatment of things that dry and constrict it. For if you do this, the disease becomes worse than before;
but the work of things softening, such as fenugreek; and the broth of water or milk and flaxseed should be cooked, and at once dip it in warm oil from dahiquil, wrap it in a linen cloth, and heal with this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care not to stitch it [the wound] in the same way as it was before;
and these things that we have said are not remedies for this disease except its proper alignment, so that it does not recur in the same form as before.
This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauterizations and similar things;
and the procedure in this is that you take a needle with doubled thread, and pierce it into the flesh from the left eyelid to the right, so that the threads come out in two places of the flesh.
then fold the skin over the entire needle and cover it with a wide spatula. And if the shape of the bone returns as it should, it is good;
If not, take the rasp and put it in the incision, turn the bone, and make two cuts along the inside of the bone;
and let the heads of the cuts at both angles of the incision you made be aligned, and let them form an angle such that when they are assembled, the shape will be as the shape of a letter which has the name "Greek";
then remove that cartilage, according to the thickness of its sides, underneath the bone, then join the two separated parts with a linen thread;
then treat it with the medicine we have mentioned for softening and poultices until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, then you must make an incision in a plain area beneath the hairs of the paper (skin), and according to what was mentioned before; Then cut between the two ribs of a tent, as I have said.
Then cut between the two ribs of a tent, as I have said. And the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare instruments of all possible means to bring the figure back to its natural form.
and the patients themselves, according to what work and instruments are required in multiple positions.
When this suture happens in the hands of men in such a way that the paper above is glued with the white part of oil and cannot move or perform its natural work, then you must push the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up.
And hold it with forceps until you cut what is near the puncture point of the probe, which should not be too sharp nor too piercing, so that the patient does not suffer from a too-sharp probe piercing the oil.
And make your incision, which you peel apart that assembly, gently, so that the skin returns to its natural shape.
And heal all that assembly, and make once in the sharp oil salty, and raise from it sweet oil and bile.
Then put between the skin and the oil a tent of linen, and put on top of the oil wool soaked in abundance of egg. And after three days use bile and other strong things until it is healed.
Know that the nail is according to two ways: the nail is either nerve-like and resembling hard stone, or another that is not nerve-like but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched by iron and cooked with pliers cannot be moved.
and both begin to approach the large root, and grow little by little until they cover the whole eye and all the light and the movement of oil.
And the method of incision is that the patient places their head on a healthy surface, then they open their eyes. and lift the paper in your hand, then take the nail with small tweezers, and stretch it above; Then take a needle, and put horse hair or cow hair, or strong thread on it. and bend the tip of the needle a little and push it into the nail, and pierce through with the whole needle, and tie the nail with thread and hang it above, and shave all the hair on the side of the nail that follows the curve and the silk to the hair up to the root, then chop the remaining in the root of the finger at the very tip of the spatula and small force, and leave the natural flesh or nail so that by incision the body does not produce tears as usual.
and sometimes the nails grow at the edge only, and with thread, as we have said. Then scrape all the putty-like substance of this kind from the wound:
And ensure that the spatumile does not touch the skin flap and tear it, and that the puncture is not made.
And after incising, pour oil a little piece of crushed silk and make a collirium from litarge, and leave it until the next day. Then treat those that need it until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerve-ridden, and you cannot push the needle, and the unguis cannot enter, many times this appearance of a nail is treated with medicine.
And as I told in the division, if it grows as I have described and you see it covered with oil from the patient, take a small amount of the spatumile as shown here: And the nail above (should be) scraped gently, and if you see that it doesn't diminish at all and reason follows, then distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litargyre and red collyrium powder, and stop the oil until the next day.
If nothing prevents you in the oil, as in the treatment of an abscess, first milk it, and heal the abscess hot until it is healed, then repeat the procedure as before, until it is healed.
Then repeat the other work according to this same work, until it is completely opened.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the sore harms the oil greatly, stop it at the edge, and cut off a part and not all, so that tears do not come.
Then distill in the red collyrium oil made of litargyre.
In some men, red pus sometimes arises, covering the eyelid and pressing on top of paper and turning towards the tear duct, appearing like a rosebud.
And the operations are such that the patients put their head on the healthy side, then they cut open the eyes, and hold all that skin suitable for this purpose firmly with strength.
Then cut the first piece of flesh and go cutting to the end with the razor until the end, and be careful not to pierce the oil at the operation.
And make the incision with a spathule, as we have said in the incision of the nail and the small forces of which one removes the scab, according to the shape after this chapter it demonstrates.
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, use oil of cedar pulverized or you distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and put over the oil fleece with egg white, to ensure that it heals without pus.
And if there remains something, and the wound is shallow, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave the oil and treat the abscess with things soothing an abscess.
Then return to your work when it is healthy, and thus do as charms are anointed with oil in this manner.
But nevertheless, you must lighten the care of each weak oil by the natural way. and of the accidental way, in work with iron.
And do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is strong enough for this work.
Should be red veins that are covered on the oil, and they drain their work and weaken the oil day and night.
Therefore, first you should look to see if the oil, in which the stone is, is hollow, and has no other illness except the stone. Then tie the neck thus:
instruct the patient to place his head in a loop, then tie those bands all around evenly according to his wisdom, and may the loops be subtle and double as shown here:
And let them be two points in one body according to this form:
then tie those bands tightly and squeeze out the blood hour by hour until you see those loops move away from the oil;
and ensure that you do not prick the oil with the tips of the spatulas, and perform this task at noon in the sun, and be very warm in your work so that the loops do not break.
and when you have done this, if you can distill green and red oil of collyrium to treat those that remain stubborn with the scab.
And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, apply a plaster on the oil of soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and is secure from abscess, then continue as before until it heals;
And this is the form of the cautery (procedure):
The surgeon is called "arissati" (inciser):
When you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a trick in it that you make an incision over the abscess where it should die, and drain out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, if it requires all the instruments as described here;
And it is called "sharp head", and it should be made from iron pointed like a chisel as shown in the present form:
And place the iron on the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little so that you know that the corruption is removed;
And do this once, then restore the bone with medicine extractors.
If the joint is fused and pus appears, and the corpse of the bowel remains fused for 40 days without renewal or abscessing, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healed;
If there is no other remedy than to return the fistula to the pierced navels as follows: and you make an incision in the bone for the second time with iron, and with hot medicines, and when it is exposed, take the iron drill according to this form, and let the points of the iron be at three angles, and the shaft should be tapered up to the head as you can see here:
then place it on the bone at the junction of the rim, and move your hand away from the oil hole, then turn the drill completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the vein if he holds his hand on his navel.
and afterwards restore the place with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the flesh hardens and strengthens the joint, the matter goes to the navel. It is a lighter thing for the patient.
When all the eyes (pupils) are opened wide in every direction and there is no obstruction or dimming of the sight, you must tie down the patient.
Then apply medicine to the healthy eye, or use tweezers with iron to aid in sucking, then place oil made from acacia, aloe, incense and saracocolla on it, then hold the oil and pour it onto bandages and cloths.
The manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths and fold each one four times, then put one on top of the other according to the amount needed.
then hold it in place with a hard bandage and repeat the use of tweezers for suction without iron.
Then remove the cysts and leave the oil constrained for a day and night, and if they have healed together, then you must stretch it greatly.
Then remove the ligament the next day and night, and if you see the oil healing, that is good;
if not; if it is not, then repeat the plaster and dressings and ligament and cysts until it heals.
The double rupture of the ruptured membrane. When dislocations occur in the inflamed cloth, then open it, and force out the paper as if with grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see.
Therefore, if you see it covered, the procedure is such that you push an awl into the root of the affected part all the way up to the opposite side, then push another awl or one with a doubled thread from the edge of the abscess. And make it pierce, let the first needle follow the position;
then pull through the thread and tie a part of the vein around it tightly, then draw out the needle and put soft oiled woolen yarn on top of it abundantly.
and leave it until the thread sticks to the vein, then heal the oil with comforting things until the wound heals.
and sometimes the wound is held closed by the vein on each side of a circle of fabric until it heals.
And if the eyes appear large, pierce them with a fine spatula that comes from the oil and correct the moisture abscess and drain the eyes, and put in something immediately.
Then draw [the shoulder] out until it is in its socket again.
This disease called "alcunnati" is not far from the oil, it resembles an inflamed eye socket and is not an inflamed eye;
and the method of treating it is to make the patient sit on a stool facing the affected side, then take the head between your hands from both sides and move it until you see the bone come up to your eyes. then insert a probe, do not drain the pus and open the light [the wound], let the patient see what is there as he is accustomed.
and if it does not drain below [the probe], know that it is inflamed, and if the dislocation of the bone is not as we have said.
Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and poke through the cornea-like cloth into the eye socket with the cornea and bone, as long as it bores through.
And when it is extracted, distill cold sharp oil mixed with honey or hot water with fenugreek, or honey, into it; then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. We have the appearances of eyes in division, and those that must be pierced; if they are healthy.
The patient should be seated between your hands with crossed legs, away from the light and the sun, and hold the oil clean and squeeze it very tightly;
Then place the oil paper on your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if the eyes are on the right.
Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right.
then place the point of the instrument under the crown through the thickness of a finger in that oil-filled sac at the lower part of the eyelid, then push the instrument called "almagda" vigorously, and hold your hand steady until it pierces into the oil sac, and feel that almagda enters the empty space.
and it is necessary that the measurement of the way almagda be at the full length of the space which is from the eyelash to the end of the eyebrow. And it is the crown of the eye;
You will see the bone on this paper through the brightness of the horned parchment, and then place the instrument up to it or where it is sharp, and press afterwards.
If the wound begins to drain now, the patient sees it before him and the instrument in its oil.
After a short rest, and if the sharp point rises on the second vein, press with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise further, gently stretch it around by turning your hand bit by bit.
Then replace the sharp point with a little gemmy silk, and cut away that oil from within. Then pour in the oil of lavender or moistened cloth soaked in rose oil and abundant egg, and bind it with the oil of lard.
We, and those of our time, place a thin layer of beaten egg white on top.
And if almagda cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard hairs, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped like this:
Therefore pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make it delicate, then gently push it in as we said.
And upon completion of the work, the patient sleeps on his back in a dark place.
Rest from all movements, take light foods, do not move your head either to the right or left, and bind him according to his position for three days.
Then unbind him in the same dark house, test his vision, show him some things, and then bind him again for seven more days.
And it is not necessary to do this during the course of the treatment or after the incision now, but you should reduce this, because the pain increases quickly.
If an abscess comes up, unbind the oil before the seventh day, and direct that which eases the abscess.
And when it is calmed down, loosen the eye and place it on its side to cover for any day, and stay always in that dark house.
Then little by little, go out of the house and turn into your condition;
And know that no disciples should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in our land they do almagda perciet, so that it drips water, but I have never seen anyone doing it in our land, nor have I ever heard of it in the books of the ancients; And perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see them;
And they are of arsenic properly: And the heads of these should be of the same subtlety, and the rear in four angles sharp.
Sometimes charms or diverse-looking scorptions are born, from which there are some that seem like real scorpions with many legs;
If there are any of these or if the charm has changed to such a color and if the charm is soft in bone color. Therefore, for those charms that are soft and not hardened, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
Therefore, for those charms that are soft and not hardened, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; Open their nostrils, and pour the onion juice onto those charms, and drive them out strongly. Then grasp that which you can support with a thin and sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the charm is completely destroyed.
And if anything remains that cannot be covered, open it completely with all sharp and subtle instruments, so that nothing remains. and if the abscess is not healed and an arrow remains, seek help as necessary.
and if it is a malicious abscess, act quickly and burn until the pus is drained and all the charred matter is removed, then apply cool oil or vinegar and water. If there is no healing and moisture comes up to the mouth, know that it is healthy.
and if moisture does not come out as necessary, know that there is pus in the bone above, so instruments do not come to cut it.
Then you should put in some yarn, about an inch thick, and it should be tied by our hands, with space between each knot no less. and place the patient's head in yarn through its neck as far as it can go, and pull while smelling until it comes out of the mouth.
and children in schools often do this, and it is an easy thing for someone who wants to do it.
then hold the head coming through the neck with one hand and the other head coming from the mouth with the other hand, and let one after the other pass by our hands that are tied together by yarn.
Do this until you know that the knots have rotted the flesh, then pull the yarn, squeeze out the blood, wet the yarn in Egyptian ointment and put it back into the neck again as before.
Make it last for three days or more, until the burns consume all that remains of flesh.
And then place or insert a plug of yew wood for some days until it is drained, and if there is need for drying medicine, use it.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, where oil and medicines are distilled.
And it is made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a plug, and lead it likewise.
And if you wish, make a closed plug, and let the instrument be hollow for purging the head;
and have a handle on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
On the flesh near the nose
Many times, in the head of the nose, there arises a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large over time until it can be seen with the eye.
And for this reason, you must cut it at the beginning and burn all of it, then place the hot cautery or burning medicine on its place.
And if you delay cutting it when it is large, beware if it is hard, of such color, poor sensitivity.
Do not touch it with iron as it is an inflamed abscess, for when you cut it even once, great harm comes to the patient.
If the abscess is soft and of such color, you can cut it all, empty the patient and cut it cautiously without fear, then treat the place with drying and constricting substances.
When solutions come continuously into one of these work cartilages, it helps little, except in some men.
Therefore, when such an occurrence happens to anyone, one should look if the wound is fresh with all its blood. Then align the two lips together in a stitch, then heal it until it heals completely.
If the lips are separated on both sides, then you must cauter all their parts until they heal, then align the two lips together in a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood powder and incense powder. and place a plaster piece of strong or other adhesive plaster on top of the powders, and leave it until it dries, then heal it with ointment until it heals completely.
The manner of the stitching is that you assemble the suture: or with needles, as we have said in the abdominal suturing; or with thread, as I told you.
of the lips of an abscess
In men, an abscess hard inside the lips, resembling grains of wheat, both smaller and larger;
then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and make an incision above each tooth, and take them with the forceps and crush them in each part;
Then apply the lead after the incision of crushed vitriol, until the wound is cauterized.
and then let it heal, and treat the lead with dry things until it heals.
Many times a boil arises on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus".
it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers, and cut off its root, and let the pus or blood flow.
then apply crushed vitriol or other powders restraining and drying to the wound.
if the boil comes back after incision, which often happens, cut it again, and then cauterize it. if it does not return after cauterization.
Sometimes sharp points are assembled at the teeth's roots, within the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh skins. And sometimes the teeth are black and greenish and curved towards each other, until corruption reaches the gum, and they rot.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head in your lap, and carefully separate the teeth or the rough skins until nothing remains. And do this with the blackness and greenish areas, and the yellow and other stains, until they are cleaned.
If you remove those that are at the first reason, it is good; If not, start again on the second day or the third, until you have everything set.
And know that the teeth have need of various types of instruments for drilling, according to what the work shows, because the scalpel used to file down the teeth has different shapes than those used between the teeth. and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
It is necessary when curing the tooth of its pain that you delay the drawing as much as possible, for it should not be done at all. because it is a very high substance up until then that one does not have any excuse for filing.
Then, when the patient is compelled to draw (something), it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth pulling. Many times the patient feels pain and believes it to be a toothache and pulls out the healthy tooth. And yet the pain does not part from him while the disease lasts, for we have seen it done with these noblemen.
And when you are certain about the tooth loosening, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth all over.  Scraper strongly so as to protect the gums from all sides;
Then you move it with your fingers or subtle pliers at the very root and bit by bit, until it is well loosened, then you tighten the pliers well. And let the head of the patient be in your lap, and hold it so that it does not move.
After straightening the tooth without breaking it, if it does not come out on its own, take any of these instruments and gently push it from each side, and move it as you have done before.
If the tooth is pierced and eaten, then you must fill it with cloth where the holes are; And if you hold it gently with pliers so that it does not break while pulling.
and it is necessary to apply great care around the gum to extract the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it, and the tooth will remain in place longer due to the mischief of the root, causing the patient greater pain than before.
And beware that you do not act as the ignorant do, who by their haste and recklessness sometimes break the cart, and do not bring what we have mentioned.
but they sometimes bring about great illness through the use of these roots that remain in them, or by breaking the cart as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is extracted, clean the area with wine or oil and linen cloth.
if bleeding occurs afterwards, which often happens, use the area with ground glass.
And if it does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, with which you silence the teeth first, should be long points and large handles, lest they double when you extract the tooth.
and these are their forms: And be large enough so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of good iron, and be toothed for gripping.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains when extracting, it is necessary that you put on top of it damp cotton in butter for a day or two, until the tooth loosens, then insert the pliers called "algefri", with which the teeth seem to be like tweezers.
and within them should be made like a crowbar and this is their form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tools, then you must expose the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as forceps, in this shape:
And it should be out and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps through them, it is good.
If not, help with all instruments, so that the forms come afterwards:
And if you aid with this instrument having two arms, in this shape: And other instruments which are before the teeth, and of this tool that appears like large pincers, whose shape is as follows:
And let this instrument be other than one that can break, and know that many dense instruments are. and also with other instruments, which are not counted;
and the wise masters discover by themselves their instrument, according to what their work and the illness show, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to diversity of ailments, and if it breaks the cart or other bones where it should not, it searches among the instruments that it needs, which I told you, and helps with gestures, so here is the form:
And let them be large and firm to hold the bone, so that it does not slip away, but can be held and removed.
And then restore the joint with suitable medicines, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, press all this instrument:
When the teeth appear not according to natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not born after the gum, and are not in the correct place, and cannot be corrected or filed:
Therefore extract the tooth. If it is near the gum with the tooth, take this instrument shaped like a small beak, and made of sharp iron at the end:
And the handle of the chisel should be held often for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, file it with a small flat file as shown here:
And it is as if the limb of which one makes needles.
And in grinding the tooth, press and press lightly by hand, so that it does not move while chewing.
Then, flatten the end with any file, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bites the tongue, it must be ground smooth until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth loosen in front, either from percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot press down on it while eating so that it does not fall out, and you treat them with constricting medicines; this is of no use.
If it must be held in place with a golden thread, for silver threads become green and rot, but gold never does.
And let the son be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth.
And if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then place the chisels between the lower teeth (if there are one or more), as far as you can see clearly until the healthy tooth on the other side. Then continue covering up to the part where you began, and press your hand gently but firmly, so it does not move.
And tie the ligature to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the chisels with the thread using the pliers and assemble them, then place them between the healthy tooth and the dislocated tooth so that it does not bite the tongue.
And then let it remain as tight as it can endure, and if it slips or comes undone, tie it again with another thread.
If it remains and serves in this way for its entire duration, it is the shape of teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth or the two molars, as you can see.
And when a tooth falls out, put it back in its place, freshly, as we have said.
And do not meddle with it unless one is wise and experienced; and never make the shape of a tooth from animal bone, and put it in the place where it is lacking, and tie it as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Sometimes this link comes from under the tongue or naturally; or through an accidental wound healed;
and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head steady, and pull out the tongue;
then grasp the nervous link firmly, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is due to a sudden wound, insert the forceps and grasp the dislocated part firmly;
and be careful that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery that is below;
and when you have done this, raise the head of a warm and soft poultice or a cold one, then put a linen cloth under the tongue;
And the itch afflicts the patient every night so that the joint cannot heal.
If a discharge of blood comes, apply powdered vitriol to the joint. And if there is no discharge, cauterize it with slow-burning cautery, which is good for this purpose. then heal it with other treatment until it heals.
If you see it swell with a dark or hard color, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it because it is cancerous.
If it is bending towards swelling and there is moisture, pour on oil, and cut it open with a sharp instrument from both sides. And if the bone dares to oppose your work, lay vitriol powder on it until it is cauterized, then return to your work as soon as you draw all the fire.
Then lift up the limb and heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
abscesses of the throat Sometimes boils called "gogath" appear in the throat, and they are properly called the two almonds. When you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, be careful.
If it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood. But let it remain until it is dead, and then you will cut it off, or it would break by itself.
And if it is of white color and the root is subtle, you should prepare the instrument for covering, but first check whether the abscess has cooled down and been pacified.
Then have the patient sit before the sun and his shoulder in your hand, open his mouth, and the servant takes it between his hands, pressing the tongue beneath the entire instrument, which is its shape.
And it should be made of silver or fine bronze like a knife:
Can you press the tongue against the entire instrument and if you see an abscess, take the hook and insert it into the wound, pulling it out towards the top more than you can.
And pull no thing with threads from it, then seize it at the instrument, thus is its shape, which seems like a handle; And the head bends and twists in one direction to another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or bone;
And if you do not have this tool present, use pliers of this shape: And be called cutting from one side, and from the other called notching;
And when you have seized one of the almonds, seize the other in the same way, and after the incision, pour hot sharp and acid liquid on the patient's wound, which causes bleeding, pour hot acid or pomegranate rind cooked or myrtle bunches, or similar things, until the blood is stopped; Then let the cure until it heals;
And sometimes in the throat other abscesses than two mandibles grow, so prick them accordingly like two mandibles equally.
And I treat a woman with an abscess that was born within the throat, namely an abscess of small size.
and had the throat closed entirely, so that the woman could not exhale through the narrowed passage, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she stayed in such condition for a day or two.
And the abscess was so swollen that it had risen to two fingers above the two openings of the throat.
So I had to hasten and prick one onyx, then pull it out, and pull a large piece of pus from it.
Then reset the other part in the opposite dislocation, and force open the mouth and squeeze the tongue;
Then insert a needle into these abscesses, take some pus, and do not let any blood come out except a little; and thus the throat of the woman was pierced, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting this abscess for a long time;
The abscess recurred again and filled the space I had intended, until it became very large;
Then I tricked him and burned him inside his throat; Thus it remained swollen for a long time.
And I left those parts and let God do with them as He willed after me.
Of the eye
When the rectum protrudes to the anus, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular".
And if it is below large and round, it is called "bladder".
When it is cured as we said in the previous section and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the swellings abscesses have subsided, and it becomes subtle, then you should cut it.
And if it is round but not long, it assembles together. If it is red or of mixed color or black, then you must make the incision. For there is great danger for the patient.
Therefore, when you see it as I have said, in terms of its color and length, you should make the patient sit before the sun and press the tongue to the instrument that we mentioned before. Then pierce the eye of the onion into the eye, and draw it out, and press it at the bottom in the incisions of the two almonds that I have said.
And it is necessary that you not cover any superfluity that is beyond the natural limit;
for if you cover more of it, it hurts the voice and speech;
After the incision, use what has been said in the incisions of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
If the patient fears covering (it), then you must use an engine for the cauterization to allay his fear.
And the method of cauterizing is with hot iron. And it is that the patient places their head in your lap and then you press the tongue with the instrument that has been said in the chapter of the fire cautery, and cauterize with live hot iron, but not too thick nor too thin. And use the application of this tool, which is shown here in its form:
And place a hair or a spoon with the medicine, as the handle of a spoon, and put the tool all over the medicine on the ulcer.
The patient should lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine without it reaching the throat or the bladder.
Then hold your hand over the whole medicine and press it on the ulcer for the amount of half an hour until you see it scab over and the pain from the medicine is alleviated.
If you see the scab, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and push the instrument all over the cotton onto the ulcer until the cotton adheres to the ulcer.
And often do this while the cautery is still hot, then let it dry, and lie down afterwards for 4 or 5 days.
If you need to start the cautery of the treatment again, do so, and after the cautery, let the blood flow around the eye, with a linen cloth in butter, and clean what is around the treatment.
And wash with cold water, and be cured by gargling until it heals.
This cure is more effective than incision, rather than cautery.
If it is cured by fumigation in this way, take calamint, yarrow, origanum, rue, chamomile, wormwood and similar herbs, and put them all together or some of these in one pot, add ashes, and boil.
And let the head be tightly packed with strong earth, and within it place an instrument of hair according to this manner: And let it be of silver or lead, and one of the shoulders pressed into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the eye through the channel until the eye is destroyed.
After the start, often when the egg dries out, and be careful not to do it at the beginning of the abscess's eruption (breakout), as many things happen. and not do it before the decline of the abscess breakout.
And if this is not present, take a rope and put inside the head of an egg yolk so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot. as the egg yolk cradle does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and it is a good cure together with safety.
Many times it turns into the throat bone or fish spine, or something else;
Therefore, you must pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instruments until you see the thing move.
And if it does not open by itself and is replaced in the throat, you must make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach. In case of emergency, use vomiting to resolve this issue.
or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, a piece of cork, a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread. and tie it with thread, and then swallow it. when it reaches the place, it will swell, and you will draw it out.
if it does not swell as we have said, take a plum-shaped instrument according to this form.
And the instrument should be curved at the top so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and have the tip raised. And beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest all does not live, nor push the bone inside.
It is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because it should move or the thing will be broken. if he pushes downward, or pulls it forward equally, all along the instrument, until it is out.
the vein of the throat
Sometimes, bloodletting is the medicine, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; And when that does not help, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sun, and you will press the tongue with the instrument I told you about.
And if you see the pus, pull it out very gently, or use subtle tweezers that are suitable for this purpose.
And if that does not work, take a hairy rope and put it in the throat of the sick person, then insert or push into the throat the hot iron several times. And let the patient drink water all day long.
Then take full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and throw it in to swallow, and move it with your hand often. And as soon as the wound feels wet, it falls (down).
If it does not fall down as we have said, then you should afflict the patient with an afetoide of the eye using the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
Repeat this often, for it needs to be carefully examined.
The method of fumigation is that you take the pot which has burning charcoal in it, and cover it with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that put the head of the instrument.
Then pour out your fumigation, and the patient places the end of the pipe in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape but comes directly to the wound.
And now the wound needs to be opened, and if it does not drain, then repeat the fumigation many times.
The patient should endure thirst, eat salty things and almonds, and drink no water.
And then it will be necessary for it to issue forth according to this government.
The shape of the instrument used for draining pus is, when it can be seen, resembling curved tweezers to enter into the throat. and have the form of a surgical needle, and be coated with lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release.
The shape of abscesses is similar to those that memory brings after this in the book, and they differ in perforation and cutting.
And it is in two ways, of which one is similar in shape and from that which holds moisture.
And the second way is by the joints that are on the body.
For abscesses of the head are different from those on the base, and abscesses in the shoulder blade are different from those that come at the joints; each should have its judgment in the work.
And if an abscess should not be pierced, wait until the bubble is ripe according to its completion.
and if there are those that should be pierced when they have matured, but do not die before maturity, such as abscesses which are dislocated from joints.
For when an abscess appears at the joints and is left until it bursts, inadvertently the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
For if the abscess is detached from the main member and you delay the piercing until it has matured, the main member will suffer.
or if it is detached from the foundation, pierce it before it becomes mature.
It is not good to pierce a mature abscess without complete digestion, except for one that is detached from the foundation which cannot be closed and has an internal fistula. And cannot heal completely.
And you should know the duration of the abscess perforation according to its completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the disappearance of fever, and the decrease in pain and redness, and the subsiding and shrinking of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
And you should have the perforation sit lower or depending on the abscess, and where it has begun to open.
And the perforation should be long along the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equal or without any cover. In those that are swollen, according to the affected member.
And when an abscess is in a charred place, it is good to leave the perforation until it is confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said.
If you pierce through the lung before the chest, it will fill with blood and become full of filth. And by chance harden the lips and push them inside him.
And if any abscess that has been pierced according to the size of the body, as required by the limbs.
You must make small abscesses, small wounds. and in large abscesses, large wounds, and many cuts according to the size of the abscess.
And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover and keep warm. When it has become like a scab and become soft, if it is necessary, do as for babies:
And if they are of such that are split into three angles, and if they are of such from which one strikes as the prickles of myrtle, like abscesses in the joints;
And if they are of such where a round incision is made, and other incisions and similar strikes.
Those who have no head, like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it completely;
And when the abscess is large and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part of it; Then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw anything straight from it; Make it multiple times with great effort, until the bowel is empty.
for weak patients, women, or children, or old men in decline. The pus jumps out at times with the release of the pus, by chance the patient may die, and you should not worry.
Therefore, beware of this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, if you rinse the wound, look to see if the wound from the abscess is small. and if it is a large swelling, then bring linen or old cotton threads; and if it is a large abscess and there is much pus, then you must place a thread in each one so that they come against each other;
and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have shaved it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or raw linen wool without moisture, and tie it up for three days.
Then bone it, and cure with ointment until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and linen cloth, dampen it, and place it on the wound repeatedly.
If the discharge of blood persists, provide management and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is near winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then you must place warm blankets soaked in hot wine and oil on top.
and if it is in summer, and the limbs are fleshy, then you must place cold blankets soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil for three days as we have said.
Then drain the abscess and let it heal, as necessary, until it heals.
And this must be universally known in the treatment of abscesses:
or I have told you how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
For small abscesses on the head, it is our practice to use linen cloths, as a gardener with a gourd, and there are many similarities.
There are some that are swollen and filled with moisture like boils:
and there are those that are hard and stony at the base, and there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose.
And the work of cutting is that you probe with every instrument called "entomoisoir," which gives rise to the following form, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, they make a long incision through it.
When the moisture is evacuated, if you incise without leaving any skin that contains the moisture, because it will return immediately when left unattended;
then immerse cotton in Egyptian oil if it is available: if not, use water and salt, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day: And these (things) move those who have remained (stuck) at night.
And renew the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know that it does not remain at night.
Then heal the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
And if the abscess remains filled with fat, flatten it according to this shape, longwise; and pour out the pus, and peel off all of it from every side, and put your entire treatment to draw fire through the coat in which it lies.
And if the arteries oppose you, do what I have said after.
And similarly do for the abscess if it is pockmarked, and cut and treat as I told you before.
And the incision on the abscess becomes moist, it is lighter, for there is little blood. And if any of these abscesses or head has no moisture, and these are the abscesses that I flattened on the head of an old woman;
And I found the abscess just like a hard and swollen stone, unbreakable. And if one had pierced it with anything, it would have made as much wound as a stone.
In other abscesses coming from the head, such as those that come from a child's head or the roots of the ears, they must be opened for as long as possible depending on their location, to allow the pus to flow out.
and they are treated as needed.
Often this abscess occurs at the neck, under the jaw, and in the groin area, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, and they are large and connected to each other.
And each scrofula is properly within its own side, like the abscess of the head, as we have said. The resemblance of these scrofulas are many.
The resemblance of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malicious and do not want to obey health.
In that case, you see it in good position on the body, and resembles the color of the body, silent from all sides and not pulsating at the neck or artery or vein, and is not deep.
You must cut it through the top, and peel off each part, and hold open the two lips of the incision with forceps, if necessary, as we have said in abscesses of the head.
pull it slowly and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, and may the spatula not touch nor scratch, so that the hand does not slip, and look not too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you open the vein or artery and it does not yield, put vitriol powder into the wound or any powders that stop blood, and hold the wound closed. And let the abscess be appeased, and soften the wound, and make it start to drain.
And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your work until you finish.
Then examine if there are any small scrofulas remaining, and if so, cut them out and clean them.
If the root of the scrofula has a large vein, it is not necessary to cut out that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it hang down without harm.
Then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then let it heal.
And if you excise the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you close the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no more superfluous material remaining due to the largeness of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it and draw pus, and sew it as we have said.
It is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it and draw pus, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulas that have excess fluid, pierce there where it has burst open;
and pierce in the same way as described before, depending on it, then apply poultices with ointment and similar things, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption; And when the wound is well cleaned, let it heal with bright ointment, until it is healed.
The ancients spoke of the shape of the throat; But I have never seen one who did it in our land, and it is written in their words.
For those who have scinases (a term likely referring to goiter), it is necessary that the cleft in the throat called "epiglottis" be shaved. And do not help with that, because all the veins and the swelling of the patient are in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth or in the throat or in both cheeks.
When the sickness is in the channel of the tonsil, it is required to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we make the incision below three or four small circles or a small slit across, between the two circles or through the thickness of the incision due to the scissors, not in the cartilage.
And the patients who are subjected to the incision of the epiglottis should not have any cartilage, and the veins are long in length.
And if the master is afraid, he must stretch the skin of the throat all the way to the chin, then cut open the breast until it reaches the cartilage; and remove any vessels of blood that you see, and then press the siphac as we have said;
and demonstrated by the section of the breastbone that juts out due to the broken place, and by the lack of voice;
leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed in doubt of strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound from the breastbone and sew it completely closed around the cartilage;
then administer medicines that cause pus to form until it is healthy.
Abu'l-Qasim says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the bird pecks out his eyes. Therefore, press on the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, thus keeping him alive.
And so, the ancients would leave the wound open until the evil of the disease had passed, which it had done in three or four days, and then they would command to sew up the wound and heal it.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw a maiden take the knife, thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the windpipe channels.
And I was called to heal her, and found her in the same state as death.
I found the wound and discovered blood coming out of it, and that it had not opened or led the vein except through the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
I hastily sewed up the wound, healed it until it was cured;
And there was no more pain to the maiden except she became red of voice, and she returned afterwards to her condition.
For this reason, I say that in the case of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
This abscess is called "throat hernia" and it is a large abscess of the color of a pigeon's breast, and it is often in women.
and it can occur in two ways: Nature and accidents.
Nature has no trickery.
And accidents are of two kinds, one is like fatness in us, and the other kind is similar to an abscess that comes from us due to an artery. And there is fear, and it should not be operated on harshly except in the case of a small one; prove and examine all through the incision: If you find it as if fat, and it cannot move in any way, strike it like one strikes the nose, and pull it out completely, if there is anything; And examine carefully, and heal it as needed, until it is perfectly healed.
Many ways of ours are, which I shall say all similarities;
and it is necessary that I say the whole difference that is between joint and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is hot and fever lasting, until the boil has passed, and the swelling has subsided. then the fever and heat subside.
With the joint there is no heat, no fever, nor pain, and it contains the pus, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a blister, and grows.
and they are similar in one way or another, either thickened, moist, and have much of the same color as I have said in the divisions.
It is necessary when you come to the care of the sick, that you examine and test first all the instruments called "entromissoire," according to its shape or chapter that follows.
And the method of incising abscesses for us is that you take or more moist leather than you find in the abscess, and turn your thumbs little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced through, then it should be according to the size of the abscess;
Then extract the incision tool, and take care that it does not come out.
If moisture runs out, that it has colored [the abscess], do as I have said about other abscesses;
And if after the incision tool no moisture comes out, know that it is fat, then do it in crossways, take hold of it with the tweezers and lightly peel it from both sides and ward the coat where it lies so you draw it out whole with the sinew.
If you cannot draw it safely, draw it in parts so that nothing remains.
For if something remains, it will return to us many times;
If a small amount remains and does not cause you grief, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, hold the wound together, cover it with warm soothing substances, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
If it is large, cut the wound into two lips, and heal it with flesh-growing agents.
If the veins beating against you or someone else hurries and you use glass powder, leave it lying for 2 or 3 days until the wound festers, and let the boiling of blood subside; Then return to bind what has been left unbound with sutures.
Here are the shapes of cutting instruments and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small;
And there are three squares, which are called "albarets", and one that is called "breb", and there are three ways of it: Large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses with fistulas.
and they are like needles with which witches are sewn, and they are made of citron wood, or iron, or silver, and yellow ones are valued more, and black ones are more proven to surround the swellings of a fistula.
There are three kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the wounds.
The shapes of the funnels are similar to one another, as you see here:
And if the ones with two humps have three shapes as well;
And if the ones with three humps have three shapes, and are also of three kinds.
And if the ones with two humps have one hump only, and the ones with one hump are of three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their place.
The main ones with which we perform this are sharp, and of those who do not cut at all except from one side, for we scrape the nails with them, so as not to strike the vein or the nerve.
And of these probing instruments, the needles are tied in bunches so that the patient does not prick themselves at the opening of abscesses.
And there are three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you can see;
do not use them in any other place except for the chest (ribs), like legs, arms, breasts, and ankles, and similar places.
Sometimes another small instrument similar to fistulae scissors is used in this way to draw blood. and it is put to the place that stops bleeding from veins, arteries, and sometimes returns according to this large shape:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to become corrupt, until they resemble female breasts.
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to treat them should do it according to this form from line b to g: then cut the fat, apply medicine to the wound containing burnt charcoal, then close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the arm is bent downward and flattened due to its size, as happens with women, then it should be split into two halves, through two similar-looking cracks. so that one remains attached to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from this line b to line g; then peel the skin between the two jaws, remove the fat, and bring what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment, until it heals.
if it is not healed or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with moistened cotton in a corrosive ointment. And leave it until it consumes the remaining meat and fat, then heal it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come from the buttocks are cases of hard scrofula where there is moisture contained within them.
Therefore, those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line 'b' up to the line 'g': [This part doesn't need translation as it is a technical instruction about making a surgical cut.] And when the entire bowel in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula (or scrofulous lesions), then make incisions in it as we have said before in scrofula incisions, and if the wound swells, apply a cautery as we have said before.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is stuck together, there are often abscesses, and the same happens with an inflamed vein and abscess.
And if it is recognized in such a way that it is due to an artery, the abscess is long and deep. And when you feel it with your hand, you should stretch it.
And when it is the vein, it feels shallow and round.
It is foolish to cover this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpit and near the joints or neck and in other places, and is very large. Therefore, it is necessary to avoid iron treatment, and the same goes for those with head injuries, and in the case of a swelling from an artery, they should be cut through the skin on top.
Then open the groin area, and carefully disconnect the artery from the fabrics, until it is exposed.
Then insert an awl underneath it and make it pierce until the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the place between the two ligatures with a probe until the abscess comes out.
Then apply the cure by clamping a splint, as long as the limb cries out. Then apply the cure with soothing ointment until it is healed;
And if the abscess is due to the opening of a vein, you must anoint your hand with what you can from the abscess all over the skin, then put the needle under the place that you hold in your hand and make it pierce through, and have double thread so you can draw it from the other side. Then tie the abscess, as I told you, or bind one of its parts with two threads around the two shoulders.
And if you doubt that the thread has gone through, push another needle all along the length of the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
Then press the abscess until the pus comes out, then press the cavity and leave what is tied.
Then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat it with bandages and salves until it heals.
Just like abscesses can occur in the artery and vein, so too do abscesses come to the nerves when they are injured or from excessive labor, and similar things.
This happens more often in shoulders and fingers and all places where there are joints, and it is the greatest abscess, and its color resembles the body's color, and it is found in various positions with pain.
And when it is squeezed, the patient feels pain, but it is not at the skin level, but beneath the flesh.
It should be bound from all sides, and it does not move forward or backward, nor below nor above; the one in a joint should not be treated with iron. By chance, it may come to contraction; And whoever is [either] head or forehead, [should make] the skin with a spatula.
And whoever is [either] head or forehead, [should make] the skin with a spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and strike at its root;
If it is large, suspend it on the incision, and strip it, then cut and close the wound at the suture, and the cure until it heals.
Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance [to mushrooms], and the roots are subtle, and the heads large;
and there are some small ones and very large ones;
And I saw a man who had two bellies that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had small roots, and were cut open, and continually oozed moisture.
I weighed them and found one to be 18 ounces, the other 6, and the wounds in the incision were such that you can see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a thin root. If you cut it with a broad spatula, let the fire cautery be present.
If you cut it with a broad spatula, let the fire cautery be present. For during the dissection there are often excessive bleeding, and if it threatens you, quickly use the cautery.
And if you see the patient fearful and afraid of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
Then hold it tight, and do not stop tightening the thread of flax until it stops the artery flow, and he feels labor pains.
If the roots are large, he is afraid to press himself because of his stomach, but you can cover half of it, then burn it so it does not return.
Then heal the wound, and ensure that you do not cover the thread that is of a dark color and poor quality and milky appearance.
For this is an enlarged abscess, and I will come to the treatment of syphilis afterward.
when the boil bursts out If the swelling appears due to cauterization of a wound or a cut on the face, and it is on the stomach and among some of the boils, as happens in other routes, or from blood that leaks from veins or arteries as described before, or due to inflammation;
And if it is through the break of the shaft and the exit of the bulb, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with various exits. If it is caused by the outburst from the intestines, then it is more various. When you press it with your hands and it recedes, it returns again, and sometimes if it is sutured, it grows greatly at the entrance of the bath and due to hard work.
And if it's due to moisture, it is light and opens wide when you press it with your hand, do not force it.
And if it's due to blood, the abscess opens with these signs: large and hard, and is filled according to a certain quantity. And if it's due to ventosity (gas), it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look to see if its appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or gas.
And if it's due to ventosity (gas), it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look to see if its appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or gas. It is necessary to let the treatment rest. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is from the intestine or the belly, you must instruct the patient to lean their backside, and stretch out straight, then sign all around the belly. Then command him to press gently between your hands, then go around the place you have signed with a small spoon, then stretch out half of the abscess above the large incision. Then tie it tightly with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk, and let the patient lean forward.
Then open half of the extended abscess tied with the thread, and put your index finger in, seeking the intestine. If you find it caught by the cord, untie it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen.
And if you find the boil, take it at its onset, and cut off the excess.
And if the artery becomes constricted or the vein, go gently around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and thrust two wires through them, and thrust the needles around that which you have made in a cross shape so that you pierce it.
then press the abscess in four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it can heal by itself; the dead flesh will decay of its own accord. or you cut it when it is soft and can be pierced, then treat it as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is soft and can be pierced, then treat it as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said. Draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the place as necessary, and suture the place.
draw the boil We have stated in the preceding section the likenesses of scrofula, and how it should be treated with medicines, and how the cure of iron should be administered.
Now we will speak of scrofula occurring in the arm, and great caution is required in its treatment, and the ancients said that when a scrofula occurs in a place where it can be shaved like scrofula in the breast or thigh, or in similar places, it should be completely removed when it first appears.
In this context, "ne nulz" means "no one", and "n'en sana onques devant moi" means "can never heal it before me". This is a continuation of the previous sentence.
And the workings, when they are in place where they can be removed, as we have said, is that you cleanse once the sick person of black bile.
then make him purge if there is manifest repletion, then prepare the patient well to perform the working.
then you throw your onions or boils and all the hair from every part, and the bone from every part leaving nothing.
And let the blood flow freely, press well on the spot with your hand or something, and if the movement of blood opposes the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is coagulated. Then heal it from another treatment as long as it is healthy.
The translation for this line would be "of hydropisia." Hydropisia refers to a medical condition in which there is excessive accumulation of water or fluid in the body tissues, specifically in the abdominal cavity. We have said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and how its assembly is made, and the signs for each resemblance, and the medicine treatment and that which is cured by iron.
And one should not use iron in these two resemblances. That is to say, tympanites and hypochondriac, because it is deadly.
Therefore, when you treat this appearance of edema, called "eclites," and the cure does not help, consider whether the patient is weak or if they have another disease apart from edema, such as abdominal distension and similar things. do not apply iron to it, for there is doubt.
and if you see the patient with strong strength, and they have no other disease except for edema alone, and they are not too old nor too young, then you should proceed as follows: lay the patient flat on your hands, and the assistant presses the abdomen towards the lower part of the back, then take the pointed spatula as follows: And let it be cut through its second part. At the point, and it should not be so deep that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and it should not be burned.
Then look if the pus is directed towards the intestines: you should make an incision below the abscess, three fingers' breadths right beneath the tip of the finger. and if the pus is due to liver disease, make your incision on the left side, three fingers' breadths.
and if it is due to the stone, make your incision on the right side, but do not let the patient lie over the incision so that the fluid does not flow to the weak side.
then pierce the skin with the instrument, push it in, and insert your hand into the hole up to the spatula, or as far as the thickness of a nail.
Then pierce the shoulderblade until the spatula reaches its position, and it is the upper part [of the shoulder], then draw [it] out, and insert this instrument with the shape shown here: And it resembles a thin silver chain and is made of iron or light lead, and at the lower part there are small holes. And on one side, three small holes are placed. And two on the other side, and one on the other [side].
And the head is shaped like a quill, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make with their pen.
On the top [of the head] is the handle, so that when the instrument comes to the upper part, press now on the tool.
Empty then the half or the third part, for if you empty more than is necessary in that hour, accidentally, the patient might die due to the resolution of their spirit from the weapon, or they may fall down or approach death.
but empty according to its potency and according to what the patient's condition and pulse indicate.
then draw the instrument and hold back the liquid, it is now retained for the caution that prevents bleeding from the wound, as I spoke about before, pierce in this manner.
then use the instrument again on the next day if you see the patient suffering and draw a small amount of liquid.
Do this every day, and avoid drinking too much water until it doesn't remain but a little.
And if you doubt the patient, and give him too much water, cure it with the sepulchre or hot sand, and by sweating or bathing, and expose to the sun, and anoint with wine; and cure it with drying medicines until it is healthy, and cauterize the stomach, liver, and spleen after the removal of water, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born who have no foreskin or whose foreskins are small and not in the right place.
If it is necessary that you make a very thin incision in all spittle-like places according to this form:
Then place a small, thin cloth plug and hold it for 3 or 4 days until he wants to urinate, then remove the plug, let him urinate, and then replace it.
And by chance it is not closed at all, because the urine that comes out does not keep it shut.
For the person whose wound is small, the treatment with a cup made of lead, as we have said, will expand.
Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are circumcised, because no one is born with a foreskin on the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating before they pull up their foreskin. and cannot copulate because the matter cannot reach the wife, and it is a bad disease.
And the procedure is that the patient lies on his back, with the head of the penis and the tip placed as close together as the end of a feather, so that the foreskin meets in the middle, as it should.
And beware of bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding from those who are bleeding, and heal the wound until it is healed.
of the penis ulcers Often this albatus appears in the penis, and it is a sign of bad flesh.
And there are malignant and non-malignant ones in it.
You must grasp them with a very fine loop, strike and clean them all, then place dampened Egyptian cotton bandage on top. Then cure it with diaphinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of a greenish-yellow color and foul smelling, then you must apply cautery.
When you have struck it and the albathe is inside in the shaft and part within the skin and part outside, you must remove the inner albathe first. And when it is sutured, cure it externally.
For when you cure it together, the shafts are not certain that they will not be pierced, and darkness and corruption come into the shaft and where it is.
You must cover all that is black and corrupted, then bind it with an ointment made of honey and flour which is made from the peel of pomegranate rinds and vine leaves, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if there is discharge of blood, bring the lunar cautery as follows:
The cauteries aid in combined applications: it means, in the drawing of blood, and in rotting.
if the head of the penis is rotten and pulled out, it is necessary that you insert or lead a sheath of yew, and make the patient urinate.
if the skin is torn on the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to injury or abscess, then you must scrape it with the instrument of comb, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
if it is necessary to talk about this, you must scrape it with the spatula slightly from the head of the penis and the skin.
Then gently insert it (the dislocated joint) between them (the two bones), and place a thin linen cloth dampened in cold water on it, so that it does not swell again.
Circumcision is not a continuous cutting as other wounds are; Nevertheless, when we perform this work of our own will and specifically on children, it is necessary that we do the best and easiest work for their salvation.
I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for it is not in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I have seen the majority of masters and healers who perform circumcisions around there (the area), using force, and without using anesthesia.
the pain is avoided because there are two cloths (or layers), and by chance if one of them is struck above, the one below remains. And it (should) recover covered, and the pain is doubled, and at the cleansing which is deep in the limb, there is no assurance of the point of the member.
And in the cleaning of the nail by chance, the iron may slip, and it will spoil the work, and many times (it) arises so that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this happen.
In the amputation which is made all through the thread of iron I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the saw cuts exactly as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, cut evenly all the time; but that the thread be well tightened around the skin.
and the manner of the first work is that you make the child understand that you only bind the thread around the penis, and then let it be relieved in all ways that you can.
Then make it be between your hands straight, and press the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see them, nor any of the tools.
Then place your hand at the neck and blow or squeeze, and draw it up as far as the head of the neck is in. then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it under the foot to another cord.
then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it under the foot to another cord. and hold it as required by the second knot at the elbow and the wrist, and press between the two cords, then pull the cord quickly upwards and draw the head of the neck. Then let the blood come out little by little, for it is the healing process. And pour powder on top and above the powder, you stick a glue made from cooked egg white steeped in rose water, mixed with fresh and good rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
The shape of the force during the healing process is as follows:
The two shoulders should be tender and sharp, and the shoulders equally as wide as the hand.
The error in healing is when the cavity within is incised.
Therefore you must stretch it with your nail so that it becomes an abscess.
And stretch it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then take tweezers and stretch it.
And if they exceed three days, and what is beneath the scrotum swells, let it be until the abscesses have subsided, and lightly incise (or lance) the skin.
If the head can move like you can move it, and keep away from the area of the scrotum, it will not be harmed.
Then treat the wound with healing powders, as we have said or treated with powders, and if it moves too much, it will go above (or grow), but it will not be harmed.
Then treat it (the wound) until it heals.
Retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to a stone in the bladder, or frozen blood, or watery stool, or a child born dead, or similar things, as we have said in the division (section).
And if the urine is not released, and you see it is retained due to a stone or neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over his knees; and the feet should be placed on the back, extend his belly from above the lower back, and restrain the patient as much as he can; then the neck of the bladder is pressed towards the expression of the stone above it, so that the urine is released;
and if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is its form:
And let it be of fine silver thread, as thin as a bird's feather; And let the cable be a palm and a half long, and be fine at one end.
And the manner of the urine outflow is that you take a double thread, tie one end of the cotton or woolen yarn to it and push the threaded end into the syringe;
and squeeze the excess of the cotton and push it up to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and rub the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and cold water;
Then gently insert the syringe into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod above towards the buttock.
Then place the syringe towards the bladder, and make the patient feel it arrive at the empty spot, and this is not done according to this order for any other reason than because the one guiding it makes a turn.
Then wind the thread around all the woolen yarn, and make the patient urinate following the yarn, then remove it, and correct the urine.
Then repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient is relieved.
When scorches or blood comes in the bladder, or pus is assembled there and you see it distill liquids and medicines, then use all the instruments called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has been pierced three times: One on one side, and the other on the other; as you see.
And the joints of the neck shall be closed in such a way that the medicine is thick enough to stop the worm, if one can drain the moisture and insert what is necessary;
And when you see that you throw your medicine into the bladder, put the head of the cuestour in the moisture and draw out the worm that is there;
If you draw out the moisture from the cuestour, then push the drawing hard; The worm will enter into it (the cuestour), and will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
And this is the form of the subtle enema with which one instills the bladder:
And it is of silver or iron, and the head is raised higher;
and under the arm where the bones fall;
then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture which you use to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with good doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire;
then insert the head of the bladder into the penis, then hold your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, and pierce it roundly; Then push the strong thread into those wounds, then gather the circle in the same way one gathers a thimble, and put oil, moisture, and water inside it and tie it in the instrument.
And do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
From the stone
We have already said in the section on stones about the methods of extraction and medicines.
I have also said the difference between a stone embedded in the flesh and all the signs, and for which stones one should operate with incision. and in the bladder, and in the penis;
And I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone embedded in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that water jumps out of the bladder like water in its subtlety.
And he opens an hernia, and greatly stretches the patient's vein, and pierces it many times, then ties it. And for these reasons, the foundations are filled with fear.
And children's healing is light until they are four years old, and it is very serious in the elderly, and it is moderate in those who are between youth and old age.
And the treatment of large arrows is lighter than that of small ones.
And when we come to treatment, it is first necessary to purify the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines. For it sometimes obstructs seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and bend them back and move downwards so that the arrow points to the depth of the bladder, and withdraw it once towards the top.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely descending downwards.
Touch it inside and hold it there.
If you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall at the touch, moisten your left index finger with oil, if the patient is an infant, or use your thumb, if the patient is a fully-grown young person. Push it into its foundation, press the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, pull the stone to the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger and push it towards the place where you intend to cut.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to spread his right hand upwards, and with his left hand peel off the skin that is under the testicles in the area where the cutting is to be done.
Then push the large spatula, of which it is the shape: And place it between that which is between the cheeks and the bottom, not in the middle but at the left side of the nose.
and be straight above the stone, and your thumb should be at the bottom or base, and the tip of the spatula should be wide in length but narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
In case the pressure on the thumb which is at the base causes it to jump out due to effort.
And know that there are several stones or areas with edges and borders: if it is gritted out (? - not sure about this one);
And if there is a concave area, similar to a plum pit and rounded, from which the stone easily emerges.
For the one with angles and edges, make the cut larger.
And if it does not jump, then you must press with pliers that are similar to a chisel at the tip, to forcibly move the stone so that it does not escape. or you push underneath the instrument curved slightly at the tip.
and if you cannot maneuver it in this way, then enlarge the small opening a bit, and if it does not burst out, stretch it with glass.
and if there are more than one stone, then push the largest one against the bladder's neck first, then strike it, then pull it, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
If it is very large, it must be made larger by making a bigger incision. For two things happen to the sick person: or he dies, or the urine comes immediately due to the loins which cannot be sealed.
but still make efforts to drain it, or break it with pincers, as you draw it in pieces.
and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bind it, and put on it a damp cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in oil and cold rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess. then lay the sick person on his neck and do not undo the ligature until the third day.
And when you undo it (the bindings), immerse the wound well in oil and water, then apply the ointment "dyafinicon" and "basilicon" until it is healed.
And if an abscess swells and corrodes in the wound, or freezing of blood occurs in the bladder, and as a result the urine is retained, which is known to come without jumping with the urine: Therefore draw your knife on the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, the bladder will burst, and it will be ruined.
Lift the wound of pus and pus-like matter, and help it in every way you know, until it is healed.
And it is necessary that all the wounds you treat, that you tie them together with bandages, and apply the medicine on top of the wound.
If the stone is small and it is led from the urethra and thrust in, and the urine cannot come out; if you treat this as I have said, that you cut it many times, then you are excused from punishment for this treatment. I have already experienced this.
Take one iron rod in the shape as follows and sharpened at four angles, pointed on one thread:
Then take the thread and tie it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder.
Push the drill lightly into the rod until it reaches the stone. Turn the drill gently in the stone, bit by bit, as you can pierce the stone from the other side.
The urine will soon come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the rod. It will be broken and fly out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
If you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie the thread around the stone and the other end outside, then push the rod towards the stone between the two threads, pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the frozen blood from the wound. And heal until he is sound.
from women's stones (kidney stones)
It happens that stone be engendered in women, and if it ever occurs, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
The first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
And the second one is that it cannot be found a woman well versed who undresses herself in front of mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third one is that by chance it cannot be found a woman well versed in this handcraft.
And the fourth way is that the stone of a woman is deeper than that of a man, for this reason you must make a more profound incision and it causes great fear. And if you need to do it, then you must take a skilled midwife, and even though she is hard to find, do not resort to using an unchaste mirror;
and show a wise bailiff in the affairs of women or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her to do what you command in the incision of the stone. And examine very well if the woman is a virgin:
And examine very well if the woman is a virgin: Then one must place the finger or probe and search for the stone.
and if it is found, one should hold it with the finger under it, and instruct the woman to push her hand or press against the patient, and search and press her left hand on the bladder.
If it is found, it should be moved gently from the entrance of the bladder downwards until it reaches the root of the thigh.
Then strike the stone at the root of the thigh near the mons pubis, where it can be moved easily, and feel the stone in that area. and do not move the finger above or below the stone, and cut it (the stone) at first small parts;
and do not move the finger above or below the stone, and cut it (the stone) at first small parts; Then push the iron into the abdomen, if you feel the arrow, press the wound so that the arrow can come out easily, and know that there are many kinds of arrows.
this is to know: small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with grooves.
know the appearances to understand the outcome.
And if the arrow escapes you, put it in its place with broken vitriol and hold it for an hour until the wound is cauterized.
Then return to your work until the arrow is out, and have tools that I told you about in extracting the arrow for men to help you in your task.
and if the arrow escapes you, and it is an artery that is cut, put powder on the place and hold with tourniquets and bandages, do not start again, let the arrow be and do not draw it out, for there is danger the patient may die. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the wounds have closed, return to your work, until the arrow is expelled.
Aquous (is) nothing other than a collection of moisture or white chalk which is beneath the coil of the egg, containing water.
and is called "syfac," and sometimes it is properly in the eggshell, if one thinks that it is another egg. and it is the membrane of the shell between the white chalk (we have said).
It does not happen unless there is a hole (in the shell). And the growth of this hernia is due to weakness that comes from the bladder, and the matter spreads out.
And sometimes it comes from impact on the eggshell, and this moisture has many colors: or it is yellowish discoloration, or without redness, or black, or white watery liquid, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white and shapeless as we have said, it is an abscess; it is long like an egg, and does not open the eyes, for it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the very cloth (of the abscess), it is an abscess with a part of an egg and for that reason one thinks that it is another egg.
And if there is moisture between the outer layer (of the eye) and the white shapeless (area), one can feel it well.
Therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, you must test with all the introducer (instrument) and thus determine its form as mentioned above. Accordingly, judge what is inside based on the probe that comes afterwards.
And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be purified to our ability and the filling of his body.
Then lay him on his back, upon something slightly high, and put much cloth under him.
then lie him on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the shoulders.
then take the spatula, strike the skin of the shoulders along its length down to the end of the tip, and make the incision straight in dividing the skin of the shoulders up to the elbow, and peel it off delicately according to your ability.
then pierce the skin deeply with water, and draw out all the water, and then put your fingers, and stretch the skin upward.
And do not touch the heart of the kidneys, but only the bladder. Cut through or in pieces the ribcage of him finely, otherwise if you do not cut it skillfully, the wound will return.
If the egg jumps in your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work with the bladder.
Then assemble the two bellies of the kidneys in one stitch, then heal it as with other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the discharge of blood.
Then cut the kidney with everything attached and extract the egg, and heal it as we have said.
And if the humerus is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; If the other part is placed similarly to how you did the first one, then squeeze out the blood and put moistened linen soaked in rose oil on the wound.
If the other part is placed similarly to how you did the first one, then squeeze out the blood and put moistened linen soaked in rose oil on the wound. and put another piece of moistened linen soaked in wine and oil on both sides, and place bandages over them, and tie it all up with the same kind of string as shown here.
Then take the bandages and fill them with hempen cloth as shown here, sewn together in the shape of a collar for the arm, one end grasps the base up to the back, the other at the handle.
And the other shoulder joint is placed on top of the two angles, and all the rest is gathered in the bracelet loop.
At times, this ramie (or bandage) of fire cautery is used in place of iron size, and it is that you take the cauterizing cultellar knife, touch the skin of the wound, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the whitish substance containing the aqueous fluid is exposed;
if you take the cautery in this form and pierce the whitish substance at once with it, then scrape off that thin layer of heated cautery;
And beat it in all ways as you can until it is burned completely.
and make sure the fire does not touch the egg (meaning: yolk).
And know that this work is more wholesome; and moves guarding against bleeding, and moistens that the works of cutting;
and if nothing happens contrary to you, or abscesses swell or bleeding or something else, treat what happens contrary to you, according to what has been said before;
And if the patient is afraid and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, introduce perforation as I tell you, and it is that when you are quite certain through the signs we have said that a hernia is present, make the patient sit on an elevated seat; then pierce the abscess in the part beneath all the spoutulum wide and place the perforation along the length of the body.
And let the wounds be wide, so that all the sharp corners flow freely;
then place cotton on the wound, tie it up, and let the remaining blood flow freely, then cure it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not allow blood to flow from the wound's mouth, then you must put a feather or instrument for draining fluid from hydropics into it, as described previously;
and widen the wound, check that the blood returns, and wait for it to heal, which is about 6 months or more, and when it heals as described before, the patient will recover their health.
Check that in the section of this artery there is fear of various positions, so it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
And I shall tell you the work and the likeness of an abscess.
Then many abscesses come in bodies, and especially in joints; And this happens frequently.
This is caused by an excess of sour and wet, which is spread in the kidneys or by trauma.
The color of the abscess follows the body's complexion; No pain is found, and the abscess is severe.
Sometimes an abscess is hard and stony, of such color, and at times comes from the artery or swelling of a vein.
When it is due to an artery, it can be recognized by the hot swelling of the abscess when you press with your fingers. It should not be touched.
An abscess caused by swelling of a vein can be recognized by its appearance when touched with the fingers and can be safely cut open in this case and in similar cases. And it is that you cut the core of the cheeks, then lift up the egg, and pull the thread from the white yolk, and free the suspension of all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already softened with these born charms, then it is necessary that you draw the egg and crush it.
And if it is swollen in the yolk, or in that which is within the vessels, you must release all that softness, and crush it thoroughly.
And if the birth of the hernia is at the rear end, you should cut it all out and extract the egg as we have said.
When your work is done, apply the wound with moistened linen in rose oil and wine, then heal it with other treatments until it heals.
This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling a purse, with the softening of the cheeks, and the patient becomes silent as he goes.
And the cure for this disease is as risky as the one before, and yet we will tell you its work, according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then push the suspension ligament from the coccyx down towards your hands, to all the vessels that are near the verge, and mark them with the master's fingers, and stretch them out fully.
Then with a sharp pointed spatula, wide enough to reach the vessels, uncover them and then skin from both sides, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert a needle with double thread and tie it to the first place where blood has appeared, and then tie it to the other side. Then strike it in the middle directly, according to the length of the body, and pull out the corrupt moisture.
Then heal the wound as one would heal another [similar] wound, so that no animal cheeps that is fed by either side [of the wound].
for in this way no harm comes, and if all the animals come to it, then you must draw blood from all of them. so that the eyes do not lose their milk due to the wounds of animals, and they dry up and cannot help themselves.
The consequences of this dislocation are by the section that comes out or the extension above the stomach in the area of the inguinal region, which is why the intestines descend from that cut through one of the eyes.
and this cut is either the syphac or the extension of it, and these two types of wounds come from many causes:
or of percussion, or of a jump, or of a fall, or of lifting a heavy load, and similar things;
and the signs when it is of stretching the sinew, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly. and abscesses are equal towards the full, because the sinew follows the intestines.
And the signs when it is of the section of the dislocation, are that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, under the skin near, and this is due to the outflow of the intestine and the body turning away from the dislocation.
And sometimes the intestines come out through the hernia, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments there is fear, therefore it is necessary to escape from them.
And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to pull the intestine with their hand into the wound if they can reach it. then put it on its neck. hold it between your hands, and lift the legs;
then stretch the skin above, and cut all the hide of the cheeks with long strokes; Then insert the little fingers of the waist deeply according to what is necessary to open the wound, and so that the thumb can come out.
Then peel off the flesh that is beneath the skin of the nails, until the white flesh under the skin is exposed all around.
Then insert your index finger into the nail where the nail and the white flesh under the skin meet, between the second layer of flesh, and separate the part that is behind the fingernail and between the second layer of flesh.
And then move your right hand inside the nail cavity, and lift the white flesh upward to your left hand, and peel off the fingernail entirely in the direction of the waist. And command the minister to extend the arm upwards, and untie the one that is behind the elbow.
And if there is any evidence of the intestines wrapped around or hardened white matter, and if you find anything like that, push it into the abdomen.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made from X threads, and push it into the back part of the white matter, which is after the hide of the kidneys. After the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads. Then put them one on top of the other in a cross shape and tie the white matter, as we have said is behind the hide of the kidneys, with a strong knot of 2 parts. Then wrap the heads of the fingers, and tie them together with two bands, so that no one feeding them can enter into it, except abscess pus comes in. and place the linen straight according to the first linen of that length two times its own, and afterwards leave a small opening at the end where the swelling is near the bones a finger's width. And after all the rest according to the roundness that the egg bears;
Then cut in the part that is beneath the skin of the eyes, as much as it requires without damaging it, and bend, as we have said before.
Then bring dampened wool in oil, apply it to the wounds, and bring the thread that we have mentioned. And sometimes the whites are cauterized as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bleeding. For this often happens, and let the thread stay until it has closed up.
And if it takes a long time to close, warm it with hot water and apply what we have said on it until it has closed.
Then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
of a carnous hernia
In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a sprig of willow, in this manner you tie the branches after cutting them lightly below.
Then cut it [the affected area] in half, and treat the abscess of those who work [the area], until the pus stops.
And heal as we have said, until it is healthy.
Sometimes gangrene comes in wounds, as we have said, and open the limbs.
And do not remove any of the internal organs such as bowels, and if some are removed, it is bad, and repair them every hour.
Furthermore, if it remains too long in this place, the wound or fester, as long as the internal organs are being removed.
This happens due to the spread of the fester which is in wounds, as we have said, because it is extended, then the limbs are softened and inflamed and opened.
And the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said;
Sometimes it is healed by iron in this manner: and the patient lies supine on his back between your hands, then strike the swelling at the wound site according to the size of three fingers;
and draw out the pus that is under the skin, then take the iron and place it on the visible part of the abscess;
and press down deeply into the belly, then burn the two visible parts of the abscess on top of the iron tip, one after the other;
then remove the iron tip, and do not cover or extend the abscess or anything else, as I have previously told you in the treatment of the ramie of the intestines; Then treat it with wound treatment.
Then treat it with wound treatment. And when you cut the threads (sutures), if it becomes infected and heals the wound, let it remain until it is healed.
The fistula (li sifac) is closed, and it has no appearance in the wound, and the cauterization is performed in this place, and it is closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin around the eyes
Often, the skin around the eyes becomes soft in some men due to the internal charms being softened and there is pus visible.
It is necessary, when one wants to treat it, that you make the patient lie down on their back, and strike the softened skin on the natural skin.
Then bring the two lips together in a stitch, and if you see, first make a seam for the excess skin softened with three or four stitches firmly.
Then strike between the stitches, and the wound as with other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
The punishment or correction (of a patient)
Know that amputations are condemned in our law, and for this reason I would not like to speak about them in this book.
And it is not necessary unless for two reasons:
because the mirror in amputation answers when asked, and in amputation, the treatment.
And the other, because we often need to use training with some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and others.
Then I say that trainings are done in two ways: or by attraction, or by cutting.
In that which we do by attraction, let us sit the beast in hot water until its joints are softened and loosened. Hold them with your hand until they are set and you no longer feel them.
The cautery of the incision: It is necessary that you mark the beast, and press the skin of the hocks with your left hand, then tie the thong, and strike on each ear when you have well flayed them;
and leave any small piece of flesh or subtle flesh that is on the hooves;
And this method of cauterization is better than the one made by attraction, because at attraction something from the hocks may remain accidentally, causing the beast to desire lust;
Then heal the wound until it is healed.
Hermaphrodites (intersex individuals)
Hermaphroditus is according to two kinds of humans: One such case is when there are two openings wide apart as in the shape of a woman's figure with hair between them and sometimes urinating inside (courting).
And the other method is in women, and it has above the hilt like a rod and they pierce it.
And the treatment for the man and the woman is that you press the closed wounds together and treat them as other wounds;
In the second manner, in men whose urine jumps through the skin of the scrotum, there is no cure.
Tumor is a closed wound on the natural part, as long as it is too unsightly to see; And some women have them as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
You must dye the excess of the tumor with your hand or any cloth and press it gently;
And do not go too deep, so as not for blood to flow out, then cure it with other cure until it is healed.
And to another sore that arises at the mouth of the womb, and the membrane bursts, and by chance it jumps out, and it resembles a cow's disease, and for this reason it is called the "cow disease" by the ancients. It must be cut as we have said before, and it should be cured until it is healed.
It is erratic when the nature of a woman is not perceived or if the wound is small. And it may be by natural birth or accident due to disease that comes upon it.
And it may be by natural birth or accident due to disease that comes upon it. Or it may be a sore joined together, or from the subtle matter of pus, and is made deep in the womb, or in the flanks, or inside, or anywhere else.
Prevent conception, pregnancy, and flowers to grow.
And the knowledge of these things is through the observation of the belly.
If the discharge approaches, it may be in your hand or at your side.
If it is a soft and subtle pain near the liver, hurry and search for it in this manner:
Place your two index fingers together, and the woman lies on her back, spreading her legs.
Then feel the two livers form, until the soft subtle pain is found, and be aware of the openings.
Then take linen, dampen it in oil, and place it on the place, let the woman lie flat each day, so that it cannot adhere.
And if the wound is hard and thick, you should cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
If the opening is of new cheese, suspend it to an onion and cover it with clay.
And have the medicine to stop blood, such as alum, dragon's blood, incense, and egg yolk in abundance.
then introduce a broad strip of linen cloth so that the wound cannot be sutured.
and it should remain long, and you should also provide a dry tent made of linen.
Then let it be healed by other treatments until it is healed.
And when a child is born in marriage, it should be covered according to this manner, unless abscesses are swollen. To the swollen abscess that is within marriage, one should not make any attempt to touch it.
Hemorrhoids [or Piles] Hemorrhoids are openings of veins without cortical treatment, and when hemorrhoids become old, they become hard.
And as we said in the division, their likenesses and signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are fully formed in marriage, and cannot be felt, are not cured by iron.
Those at the mouth of the sore, which can be felt, are those who can be healed.
Therefore you must put the woman in a cold house, then boil the eel to the point of tenderness, and chop it into its roots, then sprinkle powdered medicine that stops blood, such as alum and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
Then place his feet on the surface for an hour, then put them in cold water.
If bleeding occurs, make it sit in a decoction of sumac bark, apple peel, hawthorn and similar things, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg yolk, and apply it as a plaster on its back.
And if it stops bleeding, it is good. If not, make him wear armpits on his back and avoid hitting the breasts;
Then take linen, wet it in juices of plantain or marsh-mallow with old wine, and apply it to the place.
And when the abscess rests, treat the place with ointment until it is healed;
And the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp head. It needs to be covered as I mentioned in the remedy. Then nurse it until it is healed.
Many types of abscess come in marriage, such as boils and hard abscesses, herpes, scabs, fissures, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I mentioned in the classification.
Therefore, I must explain in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in marriage, which is not like other abscesses.
And if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is acute at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce [the abscess], but allow it to mature until the pain is eased;
Then make the patient sit on a low stool or he may lean, and support his back and gather his feet at the parts away from the leg.
Spread his thighs, place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good linen.
Then suck the boil towards the right side, and introduce the instrument with which one operates the mouth of the bladder, by which follows the shape.
It is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, that you pierce the right side first to know the depth of the bladder, so that what enters within from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not prick the patient. And if the incision is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloth, so that the incision does not hurt.
And it is necessary to put the handle of the instrument on top and to heat the instrument.
And when the abscess opens, and one touches it with a soft hand, it must be covered with a linen cloth.
And when the boil is empty, you must put damp and oiled rags or dry green oil in the wound.
And put a clean and damp linen cloth inside the wound, and on the outside of the wound and on the handle of the instrument place a hot or mustard-soaked linen cloth.
Then the patient is cured after two days of ointment application, as long as he is healthy.
And sometimes they lift the sore and the wound by cleansing with water and honey, and then with water or liquorice roots and long-cooked Aristolochia. Then return to the ointment application.
And if the wound is sutured in the flesh, you should avoid iron cautery, but treat it as we have said in the section.
From childbirth Firstly, the woman should know the form of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see the woman after pressing from below, and desire to urinate.
Then, the child hastens to be born with force. Therefore, recognize that the childbirth is according to the natural form, and it comes out with its head, and the afterbirth follows.
And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his stomach, so that the child comes out quickly.
for when he descends upon his head, the second one follows with him, and the husband of his superfluidities is cleansed by good purification.
and this one who comes in another way does not come naturally.
For sometimes he comes upon his feet, and the belly or shoulder, or hands, or upon the stomach or spine, and is transformed accidentally at the neck, and in other bad shapes.
it is necessary that the bailiff be wise and skilled in these matters, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes in which one should help them.
If a child comes upon the head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the child is weak, make her sit on a saddle, or have women hold her.
and anoint it with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, then insert the plaster between his palms using the small spatula shown here: and cut the second tooth, and grind it with the nail as far as the moisture that is within the core comes out;
and bind the woman's belly until the child is born, and if it does not come out, you must fumigate the woman with fennel seeds and oil of lavender.
then make her bind herself and purge herself with cumin, hold her mouth and nose for an hour: Instructions for the thigh.
If the hands come out (dislocate), you must gently pull them back a little at a time. and if they cannot enter (reduce), place the woman on the seat (examining table) and raise her feet. then tip the chair onto the ground, and hold the woman so she does not cry out during the tilting of the chair.
if the hands cannot enter and the thigh is dead, strike the hands with the knife placed in front (of you), extract the child, and reset it equally.
Of the birth of the child upon its feet When the thigh comes above the feet, push it upwards; and then turn it a little at a time until it is level.
Then take the piece and stretch it bit by bit.
If it reaches up to the thighs, instruct him to grab hold of it, and make it vomit out of his anus. If it goes forward, may God will it.
And if it is not as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to the natural figure. Therefore it should be done gently.
And if it does not go forward as we have experienced, say that he should take myrrh from above, oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar. And put the mixture inside a woman's nature and apply this ointment externally, then make him sit in hot water up to his chest.
And when it is softened beneath, let the collar of myrrh be placed on him, and let him rest for an hour. Then make it sit on the chair, then make it vomit and hold its mouth and nose, and press its belly gently, for the infant is about to be born now.
Of the birth of the child on its genitals When the baby comes in this form, put the midwife's hands little by little. then be supported on its neck, and let the feet hang downwards, and it lies on the bed. and fold its hands little by little, and then press its hands above the belly, and push the hips downwards until it is prepared for delivery. if the baby does not come out, take its feet and help it come out, then push its stomach upwards, and put your hands there. And you pull the child little by little; Instruct the woman that she should take hold of herself until the baby is born.
The birth of a child that comes out with one hand extended. It is necessary to devise how to return the hand: if it cannot be returned, raise the woman and walk.
If she cannot walk, have her lie on the bed, and bend her legs.
Then bring the belladonna that I have mentioned.
And if she does not give birth, have her sit on the chair, then study how to return the hand; Pull the child according to its natural shape, make her vomit, and have her hold herself until the baby is born for sure.
Hold the baby by the neck and spread your hands apart, then turn your body towards the back of its mother. It is necessary that the barber press his hand, then turns it slowly and gently.
And when they are even, he puts some muscle-relaxing substance of alum and oil (as we have said), then commands it to move slowly.
And when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and command her to grab it; and make her vomit. in the same way, treat all similarly
in the same way, treat all similarly When the second finger comes in this manner, grab the second finger with your nail until the moisture is evacuated;
and if the serpent enters on its face or neck, grab it with a rope, so that it is not held back, and kill the serpent.
Then put the child inside, until you have placed it as needed, and command the woman to take hold of herself once:
From the birth of twins   (In this context, "gemelz" refers to twins, as "gele" means a twin in Old French) Know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four. and this is not an unusual occurrence, it happens. Twins are rare and do not live unless named.
Twins are rare and do not live unless named. I know that they can be increased and are deprived by the one who divides them, which is tied to the womb.
and sometimes they come out naturally like a child under the mother's belly, as we have said.
And if they come out forcefully, the treatment is as we have said, and let the doctor be subtle, and do quickly and gently what he does. And make him do as he needs to move towards health. Of many children
There are sometimes formed in the marriage between I, II, III, IV, V or VI, or up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of his age, and it is necessary that the bailiff knows this because on occasion similar things happen. If he does as he should.
Of a dead child
When you are curing the woman of a dead or unborn child, as I said in the division, and it does not come out forcefully, and you are forced to work by hand. If you need to know if the woman is of pure virtue, and she has no accident or fear of death.
The woman must lie on her back, with her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised.
And the midwife pulls it in two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated during childbirth.
Then rub the mouth of the wife with moist oil mixed with myrrh and camphor and flax seeds, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and these mixtures.
Then push gently into the wife, then seek out the place where she pushes the child's head and make sure that it is ready for delivery.
If the head is not visible, push the baby's head into the woman's womb, her neck, mouth, palate, below the beard, or in the groin or near the hips, and if the delivery is on feet, push or apply pressure to the middle of the ribs.
It should be translated as: "And it is necessary that you press the anus with your right hand, and place the thumb between its two sides with the left hand, and push gently with all of your hand, and insert the thumb into one of the places that we have mentioned until it reaches the empty space.
"Then insert into the opposite anus, or if there are multiple, so that the extractions are equal.
"And then stretch them equally by moving from both sides to make them come out, and the anuses should be closed to keep them shut, as shown in the figure:
"And if there remains any part, then the bailiff presses one of his fingers on oil and pushes it into that part, and pulls the other part.
And if there remains no socket, set this bone or higher in place, and hold it until it goes completely out.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be returned due to strain, then you must wrap it up in a cloth until it goes completely out. Then break the toe at the joint or edge, and you must do the same for the other foot and both feet.
If the child's head is large and it is narrow at the exit or has a sharp point assembled, then you must insert the spinal needle between your fingers and open the sharp part and extract it. or you turn to the instrument called "almidach," from which the shape of the instruments or chapter that follows it comes.
And in the same way make him (the patient) fasten himself with a large natural birth;
Then draw out the bones with pliers, and if the shoulder joint jumps out and it is held by force, cut (the bone) until the moisture that is deeper issues.
And if it cannot be drawn out, then break it into pieces as much as you can.
And if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, it is necessary that you pierce (the area) until the moisture runs out.
And if the child is on its feet, the delivery is easy, and the guidance towards the mouth of the birth canal is light.
And if it is strained in the belly or at the groin, it must be drawn out with the hand wrapped in a cloth. And make the belly or the groin, until the moisture that is there runs out.
And if the other member is dislocated and the head remains, press the ball of the hand into the socket of the joint, and pull it back to the mouth of the joint. then push in once or twice, and pull harder.
and if the mouth of the joint is narrowed due to an abscess that has come, do not try to force it, instead administer moist and fat things. apply plasters, and soothe with warm softening and moistening remedies.
If the intestines are on top of the side and can be pushed back in place, apply what was said earlier for a living child.
And if it cannot be pushed back, pull it out in pieces, leaving nothing of the contents.
And when you have done this, present him with what we have said in abscess poultices that come for the woman's ailment;
and if bleeding comes, let it be stopped by tight binding, and present other treatments.
I saw a woman whose womb had been dead, then the first doctor consulted with another on this matter and revived the fetus. After a long time an abscess appeared in the buttock, and swelled so much that it opened up, and began to cause great pain.
I was summoned to care for it, and I thought about it for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
I placed strong plaster on it, and a bone came out, and after some days another one did. I marveled greatly because the belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I want to treat the wound, and press hard on the bones until the woman is in better condition; let her remain in this state for a long time, then add some beech bark to the place;
and I have not heard of this chapter being used except when the master finds a strange thing that he knows how to help with it.
Here comes the form of the forceps, which we use in books;
And to the shoulders turning from their joints. (In this context, "II" is Old French for "the", so the translation could also be "to the shoulders dislocating from their joints.") Furthermore, the cannula should be more delicate in constriction, and made of ebony or boxwood.
And its mouth at the end of the cannula should be wide, and the trees' bark edges should be there, and a length of one and a half palm. And between the two joints there should be two identical cannulas from the same tube, which are closed at both ends, with a length of half a palm or a little more.
And these two cannulas are inserted into the mouth of the mallet to open when turning the shoulders.
Another form, resembling a more subtle and lighter one, should be made of yew or boxwood, similar to the shape of pliers. And let the handle and the jaws, as you see, be one palm length, and two fingers wide.
And when you see opening the woman on all the equipment, let her sit on the bed, with her feet hanging and legs open, then push the two pliers together into the woman, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her knees. Then work your hand on all the equipment, as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the woman, until the baby does what it wants.
These things are all covered and are numerous in their similarities. And when the mirrors have been set up, the work is more urgent, and higher for mankind due to their quantity.
Never leave the tool unprepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the second pouch is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold in her anus, and then make her vomit by shaking her, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose. And if she jumps due to this, it is well.
If this does not happen, take the pot, and make it a plug or a stopper, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as rue, anise, chamomile, cascara sagrada, and centaury. All these herbs, or some of them, are to be cooked or put in water over fire.
then insert a straw or tube into the pot, and put the other end into the mouth of the woman, and squeeze as much as the vapors enter inside the woman.
then make her vomit, as we have said. If the second one jumps hastily.
If she remains after this cure and does not fart, command the nurse to moist her left hand with oil of sage or mustard oil from elder, then rub it on naturally, and wait for the second time. and when she has found it, take it and stretch it slowly, straightening it so that the woman does not shriek at the extraction.
But it must be moved gently to the right and to the left, and then pulled out. Then it will come out and dislocate.
And if the mouth of the wound is stretched out, we have said the cure for evacuation and the fumigation of herbs.
and if it is not all that we have said, ensure that you do not pull too hard.
But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the wound tie it to the woman's thigh, then clisterize with an ointment called tetrafarmaon. If it will pass and be returned, it will come out stronger.
However, if it does not pass and if it brings a bad smell to the stomach and head, it burns the patient. Therefore, it is necessary to use suitable fumigations for this:
Any of the ancients have proven fumigation of dill and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman for the retention of flowers and the second birth is as follows:    (This sentence is incomplete, so I couldn't provide a full translation)
And it is to be seen like a small stone, and the head is put in its place in nature, and the arms placed over the fire.
And let the fumigation be on hot coals, and the burning until it is extinguished, then start another.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, instead they have been stopped up with some subtle sifak. Therefore, in birthing, that sifak should be pierced at its proper place, not with a sharp spatula, and carefully so as not to touch the baby.
Then put a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply an ointment until it heals.
And if you doubt that it will reopen, place a leaden cannula over it (the boil), and leave it for several days, and remove it when the pus begins to move towards the rooms (of the body).
Sometimes there comes this stopping of sudden pain from a wound or abscess. it is necessary to cover that sudden pain: if it can be healed as we have said from the juice of walnuts.
Fistulas that come from under the foundation are swelling, and those that come above the foundation discharge fluid or pus, or in the space between two parts, if there is one fistula or several.
and when that swelling has been present for a long time, it becomes hard, and sometimes moisture causes a boil or a thin abscess, and at times these fistulas are persistent.
And are known by those who understand that it is either an evacuation or windiness when the patient makes an evacuation, and possibly a jump from one side to another.
If the ulcers that pierce until the bladder, and up to half the penis; reach the joint of the calf, and the knee bone.
And thus one recognizes a persistent ulcer at its base, and not a persistent one: And you shall press your thumb or base onto the ulcer, and insert a fine needle of iron or bronze into the ulcer where there is no twisting.
If it has a twisting, then insert a thin reed or horsehair until you feel the reed or hair on your thumb.
And if you do not feel it (the dislocation), it will not cause death, nor pus, nor wind, as we have said. know that it does not pierce (through) hurry up to heal (it).
And when the fistula has perforated up to the bladder or up to the conduit of urine, if it spouts urine and cannot heal with medicines.
If it pierces up to the knee-joint, then the tendon comes up to the level. if there is no twisting and the pain around it, then it remains (in place) bent and does not require medicine or treatment with salves.
And in these Persian fistulas, there is no remedy but labor, and the vanity of foolish healers who meddle with them.
In those which are not Persian and not ancient, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced, and the patient lies between your hands on his back.
And bend the legs up to the thighs, and have the thighs inclined towards the belly; Then insert an arrow tent or a plank if there is curvature, as long as you know where the dislocation comes from.
If the patient feels it around the base, you must insert your index finger, then if it sinks in, you know that the arrow has pierced.
and uncovered or you feel between your finger the shaft or the meat, then you know it has penetrated. if not worked at all, it cannot be healed.
It is said that some can be well healed, but this happens little;
and the help is what is done, it is heating the cautery fine according to the width of the wound, as previously said. And push everything hot into the fistula until it comes out of its base. And do this two or three times until you know that these charred items are burned, which resemble a bird feather.
And then heal it with moistened tents in butter until the burn heals, then heal it with a healing ointment that burns and seals.
If it is thus healed, it is good.
If this cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the tent enters but does not penetrate to the base, place a thick layer of charcoal or silk between your hand and the tent, so that you can see the fistula through this cover of charcoal or silk. if the head of the fistula starts at its beginning, push the tent forward and then burn it up to the tip of the tent. And the tenter and sheriff will be delivered.
Then bind those charred limbs that appear like a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
And if the wound gapes and separates, cut between you and it, then cauterize with fire or medicine ointment.
For the fire cautery brings together two good things: It is to know, the scalding of these charred things, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture.
then the treatment of damp tents with butter or boiled cheese until the wound heals over, and when the flesh has grown enough, the burnt things should be put in the wound.
then treat the wound with onions boiled in strong charcoal and dry medicine.
For when it is restored, it becomes healed and does not return.
If a fistula comes all the way up to the bottom, and is separated from the body, push your thumb or finger against the bottom, and check it.
If you feel the wound and there is cloth or linen or burnt things between it close to being pierced, have no fear as long as there is a way of faith and hope through one of the three methods:
or you can cauterize it as we have said, or you pierce it to the bottom, or if there is pus you put fresh tents on and treat it as before.
And go not too deep, so that you cover the holding device for the foundation, and the evacuations come through by voluntary sensation. Then heal, as we have said.
Then heal, as we have said. If by chance it will be healed, then remove that covering and wash it when it is cut away from the foundation, either by a tent or any other instrument pointed. Then disinfect the flesh graft in the wound as much as you can. Then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula on the side opposite the foundation.
Then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula on the side opposite the foundation. If it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are as follows: and when you pull the tent in the fistula and it is on the side of the foundation under the skin above, then take a perforated tent at the top in this manner: and insert one thread twisted in two, and press the tent on the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head (or top).
If it is perforated on the edge of the foundation within, then draw out the thread of the perforation, thus you push your finger or foundation.
and draw out the head of the thread, and bring together the two shoulders and hold one against the other, and leave it for a day or two.
and keep it immobile until the threads heal the charred area and heal.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the fistula does not pierce through, make it pierce in all possible ways, if it is not too deep. It is not advisable to treat a dislocated joint by covering it tightly and then curing it while it is still unhealthy.
The shape of the spurred spear-point from which a fistula is made is very sharp on one side and cuts through. and on the other side it is not sharp, so that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you can see here.
Emorydes are of two kinds: or they are within the foundation, as with resin grains, and there are small and large ones, and on the outside there is blood, and there may be one or more, and they turn away from the foundation and toward the top of the foundation:
but those that turn away have a little moisture, and there is either a little lemon juice or a little blood, and they have the color of the body:
and the treatment for those within the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to strain himself to urinate in a chamber until the foundation dissolves, and this appears as thread-like material: if you hurry, and it is with tweezers or you hold it with your nail, then break it at its roots.
And if the finger cannot be held due to moisture, take it with linen cloth or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather. Then pull them apart, then strike them, and powder some hot powders on top, instead of a fire cautery. Or cauterize them as said in the chapter on cautery, then treat with other remedies until they are healed.
If the underlying cause cannot be drawn out, then clisterize the patient with biting and harsh clisteria to clean the area where the underlying cause is, so that it can come out openly. When the patient washes himself, and if the threads are forced from the abscess, then the treatment is easy.
When the patient washes himself, and if the threads are forced from the abscess, then the treatment is easy. And it is that you seize them with your nail or tongs, and strike them, then heal them as we have said, until they are healed, and fear the incision by iron. It must be done thus: bring forth the stitching...
It must be done thus: bring forth the stitching... Take the twisted thread and put it in a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle, making it large.
And form a knot, then knot the thread, and draw out the needle, and do this with all the others, and leave a space for the blood to flow.
Then put the damp cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch on top of the foundation, and place it there, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then let it drain until it stops, and when it has stopped, you should treat it with ointment and other treatment, until it heals.
The dry heat of the fire or foundation Often, there is dryness from fever in the intestines, and due to the natural constraint, when the sickness is old and medicine has no effect. You must scrape the skin's surface with a small metal tool or nail to prevent it from becoming moist. then treat it until it is healed as required.
If it cannot heal, then repeat the scraping more forcefully than before, until it heals completely and the skin is removed. Then treat it until it is healed.
toothache A frog-like growth that appears on the body, and moves a lot.
Sometimes it is difficult to distinguish between the frogs and the tumors, they feel like deathly cold and come all over the body, more in the hands than in other parts.
And the remedy is that you take a cane from an goose quill or a strong eagle feather, and put that cane on the trembling, until the purple circles surround the trembling completely. Then turn your hand along the entire cane so that you cover all of the trembling, and immerse it completely, and harden the trembling from its roots.
And if you see, do as with a cat's incision of honey or iron according to this form, and be subtle beneath and draw above. Do not pierce, but rather press with your fingers.
And if you wish, you can cauterize the trembling as described in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes a silver or pitch clyster is made, or melted beeswax or honey.
And sometimes these small and large instruments are made according to those who need them. Therefore, when treating children who are weak and painful, they are small.
Therefore, when treating children who are weak and painful, they are small. The shape of the cucurbit is both small and large, or the belly is tied in this manner:   (Note that "cucurbit" was incorrectly provided instead of "clistere".)
And it shall have an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head pierced within.
And on one side it shall be pierced twice, and in the other one.
And the belly or stomach should be filled with medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it shall be pierced all around with small holes, and there should be space between each hole, then insert strong thread of twisted thread through each hole, X or Y number around, and bind the stomach as if it is a sheep's purse. And when the medicines are inside, tie it with strong thread to the instrument in front, then cleanse.
This is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with linseed oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then gently apply it. Then the attendants should separate the patient's legs with their two hands, as much as they can see, then remove the linseed oil or egg yolk, and wash the patient's legs in public. If the medicine appears, apply it as much as possible. And if he sleeps all night, it is a greater help.
And if you plaster the patient with belly distention caused by gas, and the medicine appears to work quickly, continue until he is healed.
If the hemorrhoids are festered or abscessed, let the linseed oil be as fine as for a child.
And this is the form of the fine linseed oil where the skin is stretched:
We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds;
We will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and how they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the thrust of a sword, the cut of a knife or a lance or a staff or an arrow or similar things;
or which are made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the chest, or the stomach, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, for memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound or head comes about and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is due to an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the abscess has formed deeply: treat it with hot oil immediately if the wound is shallow and there is little blood from the wound, and apply the hot oil to the opposite side of the injured part.
empty the patient's fullness of wine and heavy foods.
And if it does not want to heal, reduce its food, do not drink wine, and do not eat meat.
and place on the wound if an abscess comes up, cotton dampened in rose oil only or in stypic wine.
And if there is no abscess heated, place it on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air or powder, I will say a little more about it afterwards;
And if the arteries have moved it, place some remedies on it until it heals.
And if the wound is large like a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by sutures, bring them together by sewing, as I shall say for the abdominal wounds, with suturing.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and hollow, and does not hold together but only slightly, bind it. Then cure the wound with medicine, use tough leather instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick foods such as cooked tests (head) and wheat, also asparagus, and similar things.
And if you find or skin rot, it is not on the bone, bind the entire rotten part and throw away pus, then cure it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cauterization, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie it with a thread if you find it dislocated. And if that does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light. And you put on this powder that causes it to heal as soon as the air touches it.
The method of the powder is: Take incense, some of it; The blood of a dragon, two parts; Live coal in three parts, and apply the fine powder to the wound, and press it firmly, until it purges well and unites with all its blood.
And then tie it up well, and let it heal on its own if it does not swell. for medicine should not be applied until the wound is healed.
And sometimes they do this with only chalk, when there is no incense nor dragon's blood, but the wound has not moved.
And if the burn has opened the wound, by all means do not apply this powder.
But apply certain digestive herbs or barley flour made with water and honey until it stops weeping. Then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
If a bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, pull it apart gently using delicate forceps.
And I will tell you afterwards about the fractures of the head.
of the neck wound    (literal translation)
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one in the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.   (literal translation)
If it is the nerves, there is no other instrument but to leave them alone and not put anything binding, because it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part.
But the medicine should be warm, like water boiled in sweet oil and rosewater, and also boiled water moistened with other similar stones, and instantly moist.
And if the wound is large, bind it with strips, then let it heal until it becomes healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and swollen and full of pus, pierce or deeper.
And if the artery is cut, bleeding occurs, stop it, tie it, and cauterize as necessary.
And if the spinal cord of the neck is cut or pierced, and it is guided, keep it, so that the meat goes along with it, then tie the wound above the neck of the neck, and do not touch the throat but return it to its natural position. Then straighten it gradually and leave it for some days, then heal it with disinfected onions until it is healed.
And if the wound presses against the bone, pierce it. And if there are fragments of bone, pull them all out if possible, and those that cannot be pulled out, leave it until the wound heals and disinfects and aligns the opening.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on it as I said. If there is bone in the wound and a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a spear or knife wound and the wound gapes, check if the patient exhales air from the wound. Then know that the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep, and the wound is still fresh with blood, do not immediately apply powder or tie it up for the blood to clot and return to the heart, take care of the patient. But apply atracitive ointment and tie it twice a day;
And if you don't have ointment, place a piece of old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture and let the patient sleep on the wound for 3 or 4 days or more; If it does not come spasm or bad tremors of heart nor strangeness of aliens; And when you see the good dispositions, know that the wound is healed. Treat then with cautery and other remedies, as long as it is sound;
And if it cannot heal, open it up, then know that there is a fistula;
If the treatment is as it should be. And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or deeper, or on the back, treat that which is in front; if it is large, sew it up.
if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone and has pieces in it, open the wound and pull out the fragments if they are dislodged; And if they are not drained, let the wound fester, align the extraction.
For other wounds on various members, the judgments are as we have said.
The displacement of the abdomen
The ruptures in the belly can be large, medium-sized, or small;
From a large wound, one time the intestines may protrude, or the nerves of the intestines, due to which the insertion of fingers;
And the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worth less than a large one, because when the intestines are put back in, they are put in piece by piece if not done all at once.
because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, so they are put back more often, and therefore the smaller wounds are worse than the large ones, because the intestines must be reset to their place more frequently than others.
And know that the hernia of the belly is according to four kinds:
The two common stitchings occur in the hernia of the belly, and the stitches for other wounds on the body and the other specific stitches are common for other wounds.
And each of them is more suitable with the stitching of the belly, and I will say one and declare it.
When the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines has protruded, and there is little to return, this is suitable for one of the two methods: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are inflated due to cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in this way: Moisten a sponge or a piece of linen in warm water only, or cook it in warm quince and cypress and pepper, and rub the intestines until the inflammation is removed.
And at times, this wine constricting is made, and it is to be moved like sulfur for inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation spreading, if the intestines are cooked with too much or too little water or poor quality, for this reason the entry is blocked to almost nothing;
And if it cannot enter, make a small wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids.
And the first remedy is boiled leek, which one should not cut excessively or it will lose its effect.
and this is the instrument to split (it):
cut through lengthwise but not too deep, and look at its shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines fall out, you should put them back in their natural place in their proper position, if you have the ability, because it is important to do so.
When the wound is wide and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you must make the patient lie on their back and raise their legs higher than their head. If the wound is in one of the two parts below the abdomen, you must make sure that the affected part is higher than the other.
And thus it is necessary to apply what I say on large and small wounds.
On small wounds, apply what is provided to you, then take pitying hands that cover the entire wound with their hand and press the lips together.
and this is the common way of suturing, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the width of the wound, then leave from the edge of the wound a space, and insert a needle where it has strong thread. and pierce the two bones of the skin with the two bones of the sinew, which is under the skin from that part, until you have pierced it through, and join the two heads of the sinew together.
then draw the thread through both parts of the needle, then join the two bones of the wound together in order, and then leave a space, and insert another needle.
Then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing so according to what is needed for the needles, until all the wound is held in place.
And let the needles be medium-sized, neither too thin nor too thick; for thin needles pierce through all the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well. because they must be medium-sized.
And it is not good to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, so that they do not pierce and open up the wound before the suture.
Then tie the heads of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and put weights or cloths on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
And this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it pierces an awl or two there.
The second type of stitching is common, and that you assemble the two bones of the skin and the two bones of the flesh together with a single needle having a medium thick thread.
and when you have pierced all the bones four together, then withdraw the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that garments are sewn.
and put space between each stitch of a fingertip's thickness.
This stitching is for a man, and I sewed a wound that a knight had in the belly, which was stabbed with a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and it was the intestines that were two palms deep inside the belly.
I brought back the intestine before it had been XXIV hours [outside], and the wound was sewn up for 15 days, and it healed, and became healthy.
And they had judged him to be dying, but it was a miracle.
and I did not treat him with salve because I was in a place where none was found, nor any medicine. and I placed cotton over the wound twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until it was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of sewing [or: stitching]:
take the needle and thrust it from outside to inside the part.
when it has penetrated the core straight through, then take hold of the end of the thread or stitch where you inserted the needle, and pierce it from the inside to outside at another spot.
The meaning of this sentence is that the understanding of this stitch is that you sew it as furriers sew pelts, and that you leave an opening once from one side, then return it from the other, until the stitch is completely finished.
The second manner of stitching, which Galen calls specifically, is when two parts are assembled naturally and one edge of the opening is applied to the other edge in this way:
Insert a needle or point the mirror close by, and make it pierce only that place, and leave the two edges of the opening. then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside to that within, through the two edges of the opening.
Then pierce one and the other of the outer part right up to the inside, in two shoulders at the opposite sides.
And this is the usual way of suturing and the most common method.
Galen said this word, and no one can deny it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each.
And one needle should be inserted from one side, and the other from the other, as those who sew leather do.
Know that when the wound is in the belly, the suturing is more painful than other parts of the belly.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
And when you find the fresh wound filled with blood, as soon as the arrow has moved it, then put in again the intestines and the flesh.
Then put on a healing charcoal powder and if the arrow has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, until the wound heals. And stitch the flesh, and bind the suture and the mirror. Then treat the wound as the others do, until it is healed.
If you have no medicine, put on old cotton immediately when it begins to ooze pus, and stir it two times a day until it is healed.
For you do not need other medicines in many cases where the wounds are simple;
And if you doubt that the wound spreads to the main members, then it is necessary for you to apply light linen dipped in warm oil or rose oil around the injuries and under the joints.
And if there is pain or swelling in the belly and it often happens, then clisterize with black wine and particularly when the corruption reaches the intestines.
And pierce it through, know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine known as "jeun" cannot heal when it is perforated, and this is because of the inflammation of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the hernia jumps out of the wound, put it back in place as with the intestine, while it is still fresh.
And if it is old and has turned black or green, you must tie the part that is black, so that blood flow does not come from it, because there are veins and arteries.
Then catch what is between the ligament, and hang the two heads hanging from the part below the wound so as to straighten the extraction when the sinews fall out, and the wound bows.
Of the rupture of the eyeball
If the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, because I have seen that a man was pierced or stabbed in the abdomen with a spear.
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became abscessed and turned into a fistula, and in this there were discharges and flatulence.
I gave it treatment according to what I knew, and did not stop subsiding until it was healed and the wound closed.
And when I see it sutured (stitched), I doubt if the patient has something wrong in his stomach. and he had no sickness, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking.
and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied (sutured) in this manner: take large forceps with big handles, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the forceps have opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it stretches its mouth over.
and then you strike its head, holding it so that it cannot be disengaged (loosened), and then put another forceps following in the same manner until the wound is completely closed. And dress the wound.
If the head becomes inflamed in the intestine and brings no harm to the patient, it can be tied with a fine thread made from the intestine of an animal in this way:
take the head of this intestinal thread that is finely sharpened, then tie it to the head of a fine linen thread twisted, then put the thread in the needle and sew up the intestine, and pull it out through an incision.
and this method of sewing inflammation has no force unless according to the way of trust and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, there is no trick or health, but only subtlety.
of fistula or that it be Know that every wound or abscess, when it heals and forms a cavity, is universally called "fistula", and the same when it is closed and becomes hollow.
And fistula is according to nature a hard and white nodulation, where no pain is felt, and it is as hollow as the feather of a bird.
sometimes clear and at other times thick. sometimes small, and at other times large.
and I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, this is foreign only by one of the NINE reasons: meaning, by the scarcity of blood or body. or by its corruption; or because there is hard flesh within, and above the lips, that does not allow new flesh to grow. There is too much pus. The joint is dislocated, and the substance is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; because corruption is a kind of plague. because in the area, digestion is slow, health takes time to recover, and it runs away by nature. there are veins or bones.
I have already shown all these causes, signs, and remedies of medicines in the division.
Therefore it is necessary that I tell you the treatment for fistula which is done by handwork.
Fistula occurs in all members of the body; because there are fistulas that come from the large veins, arteries, nerves, or in the groin, intestines, bladder, one of the ribs, spine on the back, or any joint of the hands or feet. And if it comes to the property of the main member and its similar joints.
All such fistulas are of severe healing, and there is no remedy for them except labor and ignorance.
And if there is any fistula that does not come out until the level I have said and you are confident of its cure, and you recognize it, take a tent of goose or iron, if the fistula is straight, apply it.
And if the fistula is crooked, search for a thin tent of lead, because lead bends with curvature.
And if the fistula is pierced in many places and you cannot search for it with tents, then cleanse one of the openings, because moisture quickly moves from one opening to another, and purify it.
Then carefully feel with your power if there is bone or nerve and whether it is hardened, and ask the patient in detail about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and where they feel it.
and when you know the truth about its location and whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in any of the locations I have mentioned, then cut according to what I said, and remove the fracture and corrupt tissue that is inside.
and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well opened straight through, you must cut deeply, as far as you can, then put wet bandages soaked in a strong medicine into it, and push them up to the tip of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluous material that remains inside.
Then put on oil-soaked linen cloths until it heals;
And if it doesn't heal by that, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is rotten from the wound, strike it.
If neither vein nor nerve affects or major limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, remove it until all corruption is removed, then apply oil-soaked linen cloths until it heals;
And if it doesn't heal and the condition worsens as before, know that you are not going to the font (fountain);
If you expose it and dig as deep as you can, and remove all corruption, then reset the joint;
And if it remains thus sound, it is well. If it is not like that, know that the corruption is too advanced, you will not be able to achieve it; if there is no other remedy than waiting for nature;
and if there is only a little bone corrupted, and you can draw it with the pliers, take out the one that seems appropriate for that, and if there are many bones, draw them all, do not leave any of them.
and if the moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, strike the moisture and the flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something repellent corruption on the wound, and leave it until the flesh grows around the bones, and then they will more easily.
And if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, only remove the corruption until all the blackness has disappeared, then restore the wound.
If there is a large part of corruption and it reaches to the bone marrow; it must be cut and covered up to the corruption, and then heal until it is healed.
I will tell you about a fistula that happened in the thigh of a man, take this as an example and help in your work.
A young man about 30 years old had pain in his leg due to an internal cause causing matter to come to the leg, and there was a large abscess that could not be opened.
However, due to their foolishness, they overburdened the abscesses too much, and in doing so, they corrupted a great deal of matter, which became a fistula, and much pus emerged that all were wet with moisture from the body.
and many patients put themselves under treatment for about two years, without any wise man in the art of hands, until I was summoned to them, and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and what ran through the pus at great expense. And the young man's body became red, and had a yellow tint.
I inserted a tent in one of the wounds, and then I searched for all the wounds, and found that some came towards each other from all parts of the leg.
Then I hurried and made an incision in one of the sores until I exposed a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the rot reached the bone within.
I appeared to me as if the bone was rotten, and I thought there was no other corruption, except that which I left.
and began to apply balms of sodium to the wound for a long time, but could not heal it.
and then I recommenced, and exposed the bone as before, and found that the corruption was continuous in the bone, and I removed it, and then left it, and thought about healing the joint. but I could not heal more than I wrapped around a palm of the bone, and then let it be completely exposed, and applied balms to it. and it healed and was healed quickly, and there was no need to resume the work except due to the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and due to the fear of death that I had for him. For the evacuation (procedure), it often bleeds profusely, but it became completely healthy, and a hard cyst grew in the bone's place, and it was well-positioned and had no harm or disadvantage in any way, neither in its appearance nor in coming.
And if the bone is broken at any place in the body, it must be thus set: Take thread, and hold the tip of the broken bone open, and command anyone to stretch it upward; and put another thicker thread of flax over the first thread, tie it above the flesh that is stripped from the bone, stretch it out to pull the corrupted flesh below, exposing the healthy flesh where you wish it to be, so that the bone does not pierce the flesh.
and put a splint or plaster under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh.
It must be held until it can be seen and felt that the corruption has subsided, and it should be held again at other times.
And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, you should uncover the flesh entirely.
Then put the iron on it, and then soak one part of the corruption from the other end, and the soaked area should be the length of the corruption as we have said.
and if the corruption is at a joint, you should break the corrupt joint, and you should soak the bone on the other side.
and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other remedy but to break it.
and if the corruption is at the base of the hand or foot, it is a very difficult thing, but nevertheless you must investigate this corruption to see how it opens. And clean it in all ways as you can, but let neither the vein nor the nerve hinder you.
And know that the saws and files for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their hardness. And therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each type of work.
And know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to your knowledge of this art and the testimony of the forms of diseases. If you consider the instrument that you need according to what is required.
The shoulder may dislocate either from within or from outside.
and when you have administered that corrosive cure through medicine, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cover the affected limb up to the point where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient suffers from death or greater evil due to the defect of the limb.
And the signs are that the limbs become black, as if they have been burnt by fire, and afterwards the blackness spreads from member to member, and it takes over the entire body.
If it is haste by the sting of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion and a viper and others, if the corrosion is at the top of the neck, then strike it, but do not allow it to come up as far as the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, then strike at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm.
And if it reaches the forearm, then strike at the elbow.
And if it pierces through [the flesh], it is death, and there is no help but in the quantity of its virtue.
And thus do as when the corruption comes or the putrefaction: If it comes at the first joint, then strike after the other joint;
and if it comes on the foot, then strike the entire foot; and if it rises in the leg, then strike at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then the patient has no other remedy but to die.
The manner of striking or healing the limb is that you bind it above and below, stretch a minister on one of the tendons below, and another minister on the other tendon above, and you compress the flesh between the two tendons with a spatula wide enough to expose the bone.
Then strike or heal, and place linen cloth on both sides so that the blow does not touch healthy flesh, causing the patient other injury and abscesses.
And if bleeding comes when you work, then cauterize the area immediately, or apply some powders to restrict it.
then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the limb with a tight bandage and cure it until it heals.
and I will tell you what happened at the house of the peasant:
a farmer had a burn that looked like it was scorched by fire, and the corruption first appeared in his foot of the peasant, until it spread over the entire foot.
and when the farmer saw the corruption, he covered his foot with copper and was healed.
A long time later, the corruption returned to his hand, and he came to me. I gave him remedies after purifying the body, but the corruption could not be stopped.
And he orders me to crush the hand, and I promise that I have no hope of repelling the matter. Furthermore, he also doubts if I would cut off his hand, as the vitality of the man was weak.
And he gave up all hope and returned to his land, and decided to cut off his own hand, and it healed.
I have told this story only because such is sometimes done if necessary.
Sometimes an abscess occurs in the shinbone and lasts so long that it causes a large swelling of the leg; Then they run and pierce it, causing the leg to jump, and the bones appear visible, like a knight; And the skin that is above is as thin as unspun cloth, and it will not penetrate to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such disease is called "sores", and is not called "fistulas".
but if it is so long that it comes to the bone in depth, it is called "fistula";
and the skin is such that you can cut all around it, and equally when it is thin, as cloth. and does not spread due to its corruption.
And if you have reason to believe that the skin is spreading and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with fat, then treat it with clysters in this way:
Look if the breasts are large, and the belly that is in it has a foul smell, then clisterize with Egyptian medicine which is made as follows: Take asafetida, oil, and litharge equally, cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey.
and then take from this according to your need, make it into water and honey, and clisterize the breast, and press the abscess. leave the medicine in for two hours, then strain it.
do this many times until the breast is purified and the pus is removed;
and sometimes clisterize with water of ashes when this medicine is not present, and take vine ash, pour water over it, let it cool, and then clisterize with it until you know that the breast has been purified.
If the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clisterize with water and honey or have a little powdered lead; or you clisterize with honey and sweet wine, as the honey has properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the blood less viscous.
and when you have done this and you are confident that the breasts are well cleaned, then you clisterize with what causes milk to grow in them, and take an emplastrum, make it with rose oil and wine.
or you clisterize with certain medicines and ointments, as I have said the properties for treating wounds.
And if the abscess in the breast is small and the cannula of the cupping glass cannot enter, widen it a little with a knife, and put on a tent of the Egyptian ointment or ointment of basilicon until it is widened.
And if the wound is too large, leave it only enough room so that the cupping glass or cannula can enter, and if there is a pus-filled boil above it, bring it down or lower it slightly.
And if you cannot cover the breast as desired, arrange it in such a way that the boil moves to its lowest position, because when the boil is ripe, do not let any flesh grow into it and if you cannot cover the breast as desired. The bow moves gently forward, and do not let go of anything from the bow.
The bow moves gently forward, and do not let go of anything from the bow. Take medicines that consolidate and place them on the wound, then stretch it over a linen cloth that covers the entire wound. Then push the force against the wound in the chest, slightly larger than the first one, then anoint it gently with oil on another cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it over the wound of the chest to straighten the bow, but do not remove the large cloth except after several days.
And the one on the wound of the chest, often removes it to straighten the bow, and knows what will come out from the bow, whether it is poison or pus or digestible or undigested.
And beware if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been administered in this manner and you see the pus rising, know that the breast has turned sour, and approach the healthy.
Then loosen it in the morning or at midday, and when you dislocate the wound, change another linen cloth and renew the salve.
And if subtle venomous worms come after a long time, do not despair of health, for it approaches.
For there are men whose wounds heal too slowly in linens, and those who do the opposite.
And if it swells improperly from the breast after many days, know that the breast will not turn sour.
And if the breast takes too long to heal and is far away, join drying medicines that are moist in substance and dry in effect, such as diaphytum, for there is great use of vitriol, and it is the final medicine.
Take a definition of diaphytic, make it with rose oil, and mix equal parts of old wine in its substance.
then apply and use it.
and do the same more cooked and thickened when the diaphytic ointment is not present. Or take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them into powder and sprinkle it on the honey while it is over the fire;
and then dab it on the cloth and place it on the breast. Sometimes an astrologer long is administered to it, and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour and cinnamon. and use simple herbs or compounds: grind them, make powder, and sprinkle it on the honey that I said, and apply.
And if the limb is long and not treated by this remedy, then know that corruption has fully set in, and it causes pressure on the bone or hardening of the tendons. If the wound is treated with the fire cautery as we have said before.
Panearice is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or by chance in other places.
And when it is neglected and no care is taken, the abscess swells and corrupts and runs towards the root of the nail, and in some cases, it may corrupt the entire nail.
The corruption reaches the bone, causing a strong-smelling pain, and the toes become swollen and discolored.
When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail, and cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauteries are very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is intact.
and if the nail is below the skin and begins to point and swell, you must put oil beneath the nail so that it does not pierce the skin, and push it upwards, strike the swollen part gently but finely, and place hot and corrosive medicines on top to remove everything. then cure it with ointments until it heals.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, strike and draw it out, because as much as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal.
And if you see the tooth decay, strike it with a drill as mentioned before, then heal it until it heals.
And if it is wounded and pierced, and causes great pain, then you must first cleanse it.
Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula perpendicularly across, and make sure that the cutting does not reach the skin beneath the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it happens, place something on top of it to alleviate.
One must straighten the fingers that are born in some people by chance, and they are all flesh, and sometimes there is skin or bone there, and occasionally there is a nail; and none of these grow from the root of a joint, or their growth is in one of our palms.
The one who is born in any part of the body does not move, and the one who is born at the joint of the finger, by chance moves.
The cutting of the fleshy one should be easy in this way: Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
The one who is born in the root of the joint should be treated carefully: cover it up.
In the one who is born or should be in the last nail, you must cut the flesh roundly up to the bone first, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and then treat it until it heals.
The joints that come together in the fingers also come together by birth, or by injury, or by fire burn, or similar things.
If it is necessary to cut the suture, it should be reattached according to their natural shapes; then place a piece of linen or cloth soaked in rose oil between them so they do not fuse together. or you may put between two thin boards until the wound is healed, as it should be.
Similarly, if it comes to either of its sides with the palm, you strike the joint as necessary.
These are swellings large and full of melancholic humors that come in many parts of the body.
And it happens more often in legs of those who walk or work or carry loads than in others.
Therefore, you must administer purge of bile at times, and then the healthy from the basilica.
The treatment of iron is according to two methods: [This sentence is not a complete statement and does not translate literally. It seems to mean that there are two ways to treat iron, but without more context it's difficult to provide an accurate translation.] One is to strike them [the iron objects], and the black blood is drawn out. And another way is that you open a vein, and draw it all out.
The cutting is as follows according to this method: First, the lower leg is raised with strong hot water until the flesh becomes thin, then hold the patient's leg from above the calf to below the knee.
then cut the vein in one of the three places (I, II, or III) with a large incision, then separate and draw out black blood to your hand from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient's condition can tolerate.
and then tie it up, and instruct the patient to bind himself with meat broth colored black;
And resume the evacuation and healing when veins are full, and it harms the patient.
The application of the leeches is as follows: Reheat the patient's leg if there is much hair, then place it in warm water, and rub the leg with hot water until it turns red and swells veins.
If there is no warm water, heat it over the fire, and then press it against the vein along the thigh or in the part below the ankle.
Then, with the blade, cut the skin to the edge, and peel off the vein from both sides, as much as you can feel it.
When it becomes red and black, and when it comes through the skin like a white cord.
Then push the bone back inside, until it is raised from the skin, and then cut it at the edge lightly, then press it in another place three inches away.
Then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then rinse with warm water, as you have done before, and make an incision at another location, as you did previously.
Make another incision, or more if necessary, then rinse, and make it at the base of the foot, then draw it out and rinse until the second incision.
Then extract it bit by bit until it all comes out, then seal it up.
And if you cannot pull it out and lift it, push an awl through the entire length, tie it and draw, then push it beneath the skin, and turn your hand from one side to another until it comes out. And guard that it does not swell, for if it swells, it cannot be drawn nor lifted, and it is harmful to the patient.
And when you have treated everything, place on the wound a linen cloth dampened with vinegar and rose oil. and heal it until it is healed.
And if the wound is contracted, twisted and rolled together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must make an incision, but do not cover it. and draw it out as we have previously stated.
The shape of the iron used to pierce the vein should be curved and not cut, but rather open the vein.
and is of large curvature, because if it is thin, it would pierce the vein; but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein is opened in the legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and on dry ground without moisture.
And possibly it may be found in other places than the legs, and this happens due to the corruption that comes from under the skin, as it comes inside the body like a snake, opening up between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very large inflammation comes in the leg and then the joint changes and the vein starts to forcefully appear, like the root of a plant.
When the head is opened, you must wrap around a piece of wood from 1.5 inches to 2.5 inches and sew it up, and leave the wood on the leg, and whenever there is leakage, you should re-wrap and sew it.
and if it is too long, you must cut a part of it, wrap the remaining part, but do not cover the root, until it is completely expelled. If you cut [it], it returns to the flesh, causes an abscess and pus or a bad disease at that place.
Therefore, it is necessary that it should be treated little by little until the neck [or head], and nothing remains in the body.
And sometimes this vein, when it is treated for five or ten inches, a man came to me who had it come out from ten inches, and when you cut [it], it swells up like a balloon or a bladder, and pierces through to the bottom, so that everything comes out.
And empty the matter that is inside, and bring medicine against pus to the place for several days, then treat it like an abscess.
And sometimes at this vein, many tears flow, and especially when it opens in the joint of the arm or leg, causing much harm, from which blood flows repeatedly.
Then do as we have said before.
of worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land because it often occurs in cattle, and is a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body expanding and shrinking, and causing pain from one limb to another wherever it moves or jumps.
and is engendered by the putrefaction of some bodily fluids, like worms, snakes, lizards, or roundworms in the abdomen.
And there is doubt about its nature, for when it travels through the body, it ascends to the head and reaches the eye, by chance entering and destroying the eye. This happens many times.
When you wish to cure and draw it, one cannot force it out except when it is moving:
Therefore, you must lie the limb above and below with a strong ligament tightly, then hit it upwards and draw it out forcefully, and if it turns inside towards the flesh and you cannot grasp it, you must cauterize it with fire until it dies.
And the greatest damage that it does is that it causes an eye infection, as we have said.
And if you see it approaching or close to the eye, hold a ring beneath it, then hit upwards and draw it out forcefully.
And it is necessary to use the patient with purification of the body with soluble medicines for expelling bad humors, and boil food that is spoiled and rotten.
Of the pain which comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" on our land, and it is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then moves from one limb to another;
And I saw what I told you. I was summoned to a sick woman, and she revealed her arm to me, and I saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm.
And then, it appeared to climb like a worm into the shoulder, very quickly, as fast as living silver when it cuts from one place to another.
The pain spread from that place and pierced into the shoulder, then shortly afterwards ran through the entire body until it came to the other arm.
Then she told me that it kept turning around the body, as I had seen.
I was greatly amazed at how it moved from one member to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner. However, I wanted many times that the pain moved from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw in the woman.
And I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and that's why that constrained breathlessness appeared.
And it does not appear in accordance with this reasoning to those who are ill and have moist bodies and veins closed.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, you must lay it above and below quickly, and then press on top so that the constricted breathlessness returns to its place. Cauterize the place.
And if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure that which expels the breathlessness, such as fetic pills and serapin pills, and similar others.
Arrows are various, according to their shapes and according to the parts of the body where they strike.
The diversities among them is such that there are some who have large points, small, sharp and soldered. and of those which have angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are fragments.
and that which falls in any member falls according to two ways: or in a primary member, like the brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidney, intestines, stomach, bladder, and similar members. When it falls therefore in any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you hereafter, appear: you should be careful with the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways. And if this bad symptom is not evident to you, and the arrow is not fully inserted, draw it out and treat the wound.
And when the skull symptom occurs with an arrow striking the bone, and a swelling appears on top of the skull, it is accompanied by symptoms such as scotoma (blindness in part of the visual field), pain in the head, throbbing and twisting, reddening around the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and disturbance of understanding, and vomiting of bile. And by chance, without force from the nostrils, or ears; and by chance, it loses speech and voice; and jumps from the wound white matter resembling pus, and also as boiling water;
and if this sign appears, hold back from treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not in;
The sign of an arrow when it falls or pierces the heart are that it is close to the left nipple and feels like it has been driven into a hard object, not empty; And by chance, the arrow becomes silent like pus, and black blood comes out, and coldness and sweat come, and fainting; The patient understands death is imminent.
The sign of an arrow that never pierces the flesh is when bubbles rise from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, sighs loudly and seeks fresh air.
If the arrow falls under the bed, it should be removed from the flanks; and draw a long line and cause great pain and suffering. And all the limbs of the shoulders move. (in the shoulders, all the limbs are moving)
If an arrow falls into the stomach, possibly something from indigested meat may escape from the wound.
If an arrow falls into the belly and nothing escapes from the intestines through the wound, there is no hope in the treatment or removal of the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and spills, and the patient feels great pain: Know that the wound is fatal.
The other member, as the hand, arm, throat, shoulder, armpit, backbone, waist, hips, legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of this you do otherwise.
There was a man who had an arrow or spear pierce his neck root: I pulled it out from the other side under the ear fat, and he was immediately sensible without pain.
And pulled out with play an arrow that pierced the oil sac under the paper under, and the arrow was curved, and could not be reached but the tip towards the flesh, and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, all iron head.
The play was sensible, and no bad accident happened.
I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with iron heads:
I was a barber, and became subtle until I could do it, and the Christians were healed.
And extracted an arrow from a man who was either head or stomach-wounded, and thought he would die.
and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not improve. I cut above the arrowhead, and guided it, and extracted it without any bad consequences.
And if you wish to a man who has an arrow lodged or back, and the wound is healed over.
And the arrow remained within him, and did not disrupt his natural state, nor did it harm any of his natural functions.
And to another man who had an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound was healed over. It endures thus without suffering great pain;
and many similar things.
And draw an arrow from the body of the king, who was lying in bed, and he was slightly tilting to the right side. and the arrow was fully inserted.
I was summoned for treatment after she had been lying there for three days. Found the wound very narrow.
I felt her entire body with a delicate probe but did not feel any sensation; And he felt the tip and pain beneath his right ear.
I thought it was the arrow tip, so I applied a healing plaster attractifet digestif because the wound was not inflamed. The wound of the arrow appeared.
The wound of the arrow appeared. I apply the plaster for many hours, and straighten the wound directly, and let the patient stay like that for a long time until he feels the arrow within his neck daily.
and he told me it. I put the wound on medicine that is corrosive by hand for many hours until it is healed, and then I tried it and felt the head of the arrow which was sticking at its place.
Then I opened the wound with this corrosive medicine until the arrowhead appeared clearly visible to me.
And it healed well within the four-month limit, and then when I cut open the wound with the pliers which I had placed on it from both sides, it could not come out.
Therefore, I continued to refine and devise methods for tools, until I took the hour when the tweezers were well made, as their shape will come at the end of this chapter, while pulling it out and returning the wound.
And the wise men judge that the nose cartilage cannot be restored: I will then restore it, and the wound will heal, and the patient will be completely healed.
Or I told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, but you set your care upon that which I did not say, for books cannot grasp everything.
But the wise masters understand little things and what is present and lacking, they discover nine works, and nine instruments, in the reduction of foreign matters that happen in this art.
I say that arrows are not inserted into limbs where they are fixed except according to two ways: or through the side, or from another angle.
and that which jumps forth at the place where it enters is an arrow penetrating into fleshy parts, and jumps out occasionally.
And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh is pierced around, and straighten out the exit.
And if it is fixed in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days and move it each day.
And then it jumps out, and if it does not jump out, perforate all around with a sharp instrument until the flesh around is expanded, and then pull it out.
If the arrow is lodged in the body so that it cannot be seen, seek it thoroughly; and if you feel it, pull it out with any suitable instrument;
And if it cannot be due to the narrowness of the wound, and the deepness of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then open it as wide as possible.
Draw the arrow if possible, and if it has ears like an animal and holds there, remove the flesh that is embedded on both sides as far back as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, until you can draw it.
And be careful not to break the arrow, but rather pull it more gently.
If you cannot pull it out in one go, push the linen cloth around it until it is reached the joints, then pull it gently, as the extraction should be done carefully. And if the flow of blood opposes you, bring what we have said in the chapter on its treatment;
And beware of incising the nerve or vein, and make an instrument as you know how to draw out the arrow safely, quickly or gently;
Place the patient according to his form when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest aid that can be, and if you cannot, do so as the signs show you.
The arrow coming from another place, opens anything of it, or the skin is swollen nearby as we can see or feel apparently:
Therefore cut through it, as long as the pliers can grasp it, and then pull it out: If the arrow is now gone.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then continue extraction until it comes out.
And if it is of the arrow shaft, push it all out.
If it is a dislocation, and you see the need to administer a traction, then administer the instrument of traction so that the tip of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument.
Then push forcefully, and if the arrow is entangled, administer the instrument at the tip entering in, to make extraction easier.
And if the arrow is touched (by the forceps), it is necessary that you cut around where the venom is, as much as possible, then treat the wound as required.
If the arrow is stuck in the head or face or abdomen or bladder or side, and it is accessible, and you can cover it, then cover it.
And be careful to not pierce the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch the wound if necessary. And the treatment until it is healed.
The shape of the tweezers used to extract arrows resemble an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
And there are many ways to do it: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the hair root is similar to the feather of a bird, to guide the point of an arrow, as shown here:
From the veins which one heals there are thirty-one (ways), of which one has sixteen (methods), namely: The beating that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples apparent; and the two veins that are in the two eyelids, which are called "aspirers"; and the vein that is under the forehead; and the vein that is at the nape of the neck; and the two tendons that are at the neck. and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich". and the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which are commonly cured in each arm:
One is cephalic, and it lies on the left side of the chest, and the lay people call it "vein of the head". and the middle is called "artery", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the lay people call it "vein of the heart". and the basilic is on the right side of the chest, and the lay people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the liver, and it is that which is used for bleeding, which opens obviously above the vein.
And the little sausage is the vein that is between the ulnar and the radial, and it has two branches.
And in the leg and foot there are three veins: The first shoulder is located below the curvature of the left ribcage, and the second one that is at the ankle of the right ribcage. and the vein called "nasse," which is in the ankle of the other side.
And there are three veins underneath those [veins] in the other leg.
The purging of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines.
The quality of the purging, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth. Then squeeze the neck of the patient with a screw, until the two veins appear behind the ears in the two places depending on the head. Touch the thumb at your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, press firmly on it.
Then take the lance, and thrust it through beneath the vein until the bone, then withdraw your hand from the entire vein above, strike and the skin and the vein well two inches through, and make blood come out as much as you see.
hold it tight and press until it is healed;
and I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the temples, is good for migraines, scrofula, and chronic otitis with tears at the eyes.
And the qualities of the healer are as I say: and it is to stretch out the patient's neck, until both veins appear openly; and feel the pulse beneath your thumb, and then press firmly;
then lift the cork on top of the vein toward your index finger, and push the lancet under it, lift the vein upward, and pierce, as you have done in the other veins, and draw blood according to your need;
then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton; and then tie it firmly, and leave it until it heals.
And we have spoken about their bandaging and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The draining of the vein in the forehead is worth just as much as the draining of the skull in ancient facial diseases that have migrated and turned red.
and the quality is that the patient straightens their neck by twisting it until the vein appears. then take the tool called "fosseur", whose shape is as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand, or something else, and allow the blood to flow according to the amount that you see. Then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and not once should one use a wide flame.
However, the flames must not be too sharp. And the bone is twisted, for it is close; and by chance, the flames break when they are subtle.
The salve for the two veins that are in the armpit helps with swelling, and with inflammation, and with scabies, and with earaches, and facial diseases;
and the quality of its salve is that the patient stretches his neck by twisting it in any way, as described before;
Then apply the salve, and let the salve be made with a piece of flame about one inch long and wide, for there is no need for charcoal. If the flames are subtle, they may break by chance;
Then make a poultice of blood, as much as you need, and then apply it on top of cotton, and secure it well.
The vein of the neck serves to cure sickness, scurvy, and diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that come from the face, especially when it is old.
And the quality of the vein is such that the patient should compress his neck, then press his neck on your left hand, and take subtle flame long, and insert it between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well in this way, but the pain will begin to recede soon.
And do not go too deep, and make the bleeding according to your need, then let it rest for a night, because it is soon restored.
The two bindings of the iron aid in the stretching of the bowstring, and at the beginning of tempering, and in many diseases, and in stopping, and in corroding, and in sores, and in stomach ailments.
And the quality of the binding is that the patient stretches his neck under one and the other, as we have said.
And the master standing on top of the patient's head, and the patient lies on the seat, then open the vein along its length somewhat widely, then draw out the blood gently, or as much as necessary.
Then do the same on the other vein, then untie the ligature, and gently constrict both veins so that the patient does not strangle. And let it rest until morning, so that the wound heals.
Of the liver surgery The translation of the given line is as follows: "The opening of veins in the lips above helps in cooling in the mouth, and in corruption of the gums, and cuts in the lips, and toothache and around."
Then arrange the quality of healing by making the patient sit before you and hold their neck as I have said; Then turn the jaw, and look at the two veins, one is on the right jaw and the other on the left, and they are recognized by being black, and by the small black veins around them.
Then take hold of both (the veins), and if you do not recognize them and are uncertain about it, grasp the larger one from each side, and also do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for this is the same way.
Of the liver beneath the tongue The veins below the tongue assist after the cephalic vein is cut, and this is at the incision of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
And the qualities of the leecher are such that the patient lies between your hands before the sun, and raises the tongue, and looks beneath each side into a black vein.
Then heal both, but do not go too deep, for there are the arteries below.
The veins from the costal side, which are commonly healed according to two methods:
or by pricking with sharp, large mirrhin or subtle olive oil as you know it's called "anesil"; and they are wide and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of mirrtin flames is very renowned, and it is wide as you see: (Translation)
It is necessary to open the veins that are full of thick blood appearing on the surface, and which contain thick and troubled blood. And this is the form of the olive oil flame:
And it is more pointedly subtle, and is for refining subtle veins with citrus-colored thin blood.
The basilica's vein, one of these arteries, assists with the diseases that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the stomach;
And the lord must bleed profusely, and he should let it flow from the artery that is beneath. If it touches the artery and bleeding occurs, it must be stopped, as I have said; And the flame should not be pricked, but rather cut like a nail.
If the basilica does not open clearly, then you must open it and change another. Or you wish to take any branch from it, or bleed in its place the vein from the arm: It opens clearly. And then hold it in the flame, as we have said.
And if you want to know the location of the vein, then you must also stretch out the arm and feel for the pulse until you find it. Then mark the location of the artery, then tie the arm, and burn the vein with the flame. And be careful not to wound the artery when you see it swelling, for that is the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it rise high like the urine of a child, and it is red and thin, know that it is not from the artery: Hurry up then, and place your hand firmly on top for a long time, then cut your hand open in multiple places; bind the arm and let it be still, and do not move it for the patient.
and keep it above fear, and do not move it until it is drained.
And if it is not drained and swells and the medicine is not present, strike the artery if it is open, for the head of the wound will recede. drain the wound.
Take a piece of fir bark, cut it in half and place it on top until the next day.
if the wound is drained, that's good. If not, if you treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
And the stopping of the bleeding should not be hasty in various positions for the small wound of the injury and the strength of the suture on the arm.
The evacuation of the vein in the middle helps to treat the blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic, as we have said.
And the surgeon must be careful when searching for the nerve that is below, and if it pricks too deeply and finds the nerve, it inflates and the patient becomes sick, and there may be no healing.
And this nerve opens up very often, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you must anesthetize the healthy part of the instrument. Cut the nerve with your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
The incision of the skull helps, because it draws blood from the head and assists the eyes;
And it is necessary to incise at the point of olive oil or myrtle fire, because this is the safest among all veins, since there is neither nerve nor artery below it. However, you must seek the most shallow joint and do not press too hard if the first time is necessary, and repeat. And by chance, the joint swells in some men when the first time is required, but do not press too hard.
The quality of the wound, according to your thinking.
The first thing you should know about healing is that healing does not come unless to keep health and avoid upcoming diseases.
and the healing shall be done in one of the three veins that are cut: this is to know, cephalic, femoral, and basilic. and it should be healed at the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after eating, when the signs of satiety appear.
and it should be healed on the first or third day, after two or three hours.
The healing that is given for diseases does not have a set duration, but when it is necessary day or night, in all hours and at all times.
It is not necessary to purge children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman during pregnancy except for the fourth month up to the seventh. They should not heal the old who have passed sixty years.
If anyone wants to purge themselves in any way, it is necessary that their intestines be cleansed with a gentle clysterium, if they have retained many feces, so that the veins do not transport the waste from the intestines and harm the principal members.
A person who is excessively salted with foods, who is drunk, as long as he is pregnant, or dropsical should not purge themselves.
If there is diarrhea after purging, vomiting, distension of the abdomen, excessive abortion in women, much labor, watching and fasting, and those who lose all their strength, or due to something from the weapon or body parts, it is necessary that they rest.
Then thin out the humors, if the patient does not have a large amount of them, with food and drinks and medicine, if you have that ability.
Then immerse [the affected area], if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood and heal the vein in the affected area around the third, as we have said.
And keep that day from work, and from pain, and from sexual activity, and similar things;
And rest in bed and enjoy yourself, and let the bandages be higher than those of the patient being treated, and rub the arm 2 or 3 times, then gently pull the bandage upwards, because if it is too tight or loose, it cannot heal.
And afterwards rub the affected area with your hands until the veins swell and they are felt.
Then moisten the incision with a little old oil, then place your thumb of your left hand on that vein beneath the skin as far as you can see the incision, so that the incision does not bleed and fail to be cut.
For there are veins that run like cords for the incision, and some that are filled with pus, such that when you put fire to it, it recoils from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with those. And if the vein opens, the wound is too narrow, for which reason the incision should be advised in these matters.
And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; If not (the joint), start again a little below or above that level if it is not swollen.
And if the joint is swollen and the patient fears, let it rest for a day or two, and do not bind the arm. Perhaps abscesses will come out.
Do not enter (the wound) or bathe it, then start the healing if it pleases him.
And if the wound is small or you doubt that it will not bleed much as you see, trust in that same wound entirely with direct heat.
Work a little quickly, so that the joint is swollen. For this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the joint swollen, do not start treatment immediately. Put a little oil on it, for it cools the body from the blood, and the oil is made in this place where the oil is.
And thus administer the oil of oil in every treatment that you treat the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and this same thing is triple and hollow from it when it is put on the joint; if the blood becomes too thick and spreads out when it is too large.
And if a large abscess comes, which happens frequently, especially when the treatment of the vein is not performed until that time or the opening of the vein is small, hurry, and put a damp sponge on hot water and oil on it on the joint and hold for an hour;
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood flow from the vein, and if it remains in place after some days without any black or green appearance, it does not matter. And if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh resin under a hot iron, mastic, or similar.
And often an abscess and appearance occurs near the basilica:
Put your hand on it then, and if you feel that the place is soft to the pressure of the hand, it is the harmful appearance. Then do not put anything of what has been said, for by chance it may be an artery;
But you can use a plaster to harden the place, then treat it with other treatment until it heals.
And draw blood from each person according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
If the wound is black, leave it to drain until it becomes red; and if you see a swelling, let it become thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
For the person who is swollen and hollow, and requires bloodletting, make the incision larger, and let the veins be wide.
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it must be bled lightly and often, and it should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this method of bleeding avoids the displacement of blood and the compression of nerves, and is better than bleeding deeply rather than widely.
And to the one whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give soft bread under ripe pomegranates. If it is scalded, let blood three or four times; and if of cold complexion, before healing eat soft bread in syrup sweetened, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, chives, and a pleasant-smelling syrup.
And if the hand is wounded after much bleeding, then it must be treated with burnt charcoal, a fragrant subtle syrup, and other things as mentioned in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
If one wants to fracture his arm, and heal it again at another time, if it is weakened by repeated healing, then let him heal little by little, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
And who wants to fracture his arm after the first healing, and has a strong body, let him heal in 6 hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
And who wants to heal from another part, should heal on the second day or the third day.
For there is much blood within the body which is already scalded, causing fever. Therefore, a large amount must be let out, and the hole widened until it chooses to emit in a cloth. Then, having prepared all the conditions for healing, place your hand on top of the cloth when it heals so that death does not come in its place, and this happens many times when healers are negligent.
And it is not necessary that when you dislocate the arm and draw blood a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly. nor if it's bent, stretch out the arm as much as possible, for that would be harmful;
but leave it until it bleeds a second time; or you touch it with the tip of the flame until the congealed blood flows out of the vein and put on the piece of linen kept in vinegar, and press slightly.
And if the vein has burst, leave it and do not squeeze it until the abscess is appeased.
And if you need to draw blood a second time, draw it from the same place, or another vein, or the other arm.
The veins in the arm are opened at the location of the neck because they are composed.
And the method of bleeding is that the patient immerses his hand in hot water until the flesh becomes red;
then it should be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then bleed now across the palm, neither too wide nor too long.
And make the wounds large, and cauterize them closely near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be drained, put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow out into the water until you have enough.
And if it is frozen, do not push the hand into hot water, because it is put more in winter than in summer.
And the cauterization of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves.
The cauterization of the tendon of the right hand is useful for all liver diseases, and this is how it works:
Hold the hand, put it in hot water until the vein has burst open, if you can see it. And if the incision is transverse, and you cover it entirely all over, it causes no harm.
And do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath all uncovered with flesh; then place the hand in hot water, if the wound does not freeze and cannot heal.
And when you have drained the blood as necessary, put oil and wax on the wound to heal quickly, and do the same for each wound.
The purgative of the hand on the left side is beneficial for the disease of mice, and do as I have told you regarding the right one.
The salve of the thigh is effective for all diseases under the body, such as diseases of the belly, retention of fluids, kidney diseases, and old leg and knee diseases, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his wound is that the patient should thrust his foot into hot water and rub over the vein until it perishes, and bind above the joint of the foot. And the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot go very deep.
Therefore open it more widely or as large as at the ankle, for it will heal quicker.
And if you open the wound above the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and make an incision transversely as when cutting.
And let the flames be extinguished.
And if the limb cannot come out, put it in water and let the vein drain well.
And if it is necessary to apply leeches for the first time, then start with the second one a little, because the flesh is salted.
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the soothing of the other side equally.
The place of the sciatic vein is at the knee of fire, and its lesion is worth the pain of the hinge when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of his leeches is that the patient enters or bathes, and draws above the ankle 4 fingers in twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein.
And if it opens, then draw out in all ways that you can, and by crossing over. It is better to cut it off, for the flesh is rotten, and it responds well to human hands.
It is better to cut it off, for the flesh is rotten, and it responds well to human hands. And if you do not heal it, no remedy will open or close the thigh bone, and turn towards the little finger, and beware of nerves.
Make such a pressure on the blood that you see, then cut the ligament, put cotton on it and press. It is now healed.
Blisters are made of horn, or hare, or glass.
And blistering is done according to two methods: or by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
And this blistering that is done without wounding can be done in two ways: It is to all fire, or without fire;
and ventilation which is made by wounding and the extraction of blood if it is done in 14 inches on the body, so the one who is entirely in summer (the head) is affected. and the others are in the neck; and the others in the two sides of the neck; and the ventous (boils) under the chin; and the boils of the shoulders; and the boils on the legs; and the boils in the two arms; and the boils of the two legs; and the boils on the ankles;
and ventilation does not deal with blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it should not be doubted at all, if as with opening of a vein. And it should not be administered, neither at every fire nor with fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body is emptied.
If by necessity of diseases it is required to apply leeches, or according to custom, we will administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and at every time.
for there are those who, when they need to apply leeches, have a heavy head;
and to those who find repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and are bleeding; And if there are some who think, and see by no blood and boils and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially if it is outside of the month, we command to ventose after 3 hours of the day.
The mouthwash helps with the pain in the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that it should be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this ventilation is in place of the mouthwash for the headache ... and it is not necessary that those who are of cold constitution should use it, or who have catarrh, because it does them great harm.
And for this reason, it is not necessary that the guards should use it, nor those with cold head diseases.
And those who heal themselves often become careless and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the danger of negligence.
Ventilation around the neck is in place of the mouthwash for the head and basilica, and for this reason it is effective against the stiffness, and splitting of the channel of the worm, and swelling, and fullness.
And it should not be held too tightly, for if it remains firmly pressed, it may cause obstinacy or stomach and heart ailments.
The ventosations in the ribs of the neck are worth the pains of the head, and otalgia and migraines, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the sanctuary of Basilica.
And you should instruct the lord to press his hand gently, not to crush the artery, and not let blood come out excessively.
The ventosation under the chin is worth the mouth diseases, and corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth. And it is in the place of the sanctuary of the two lips.
The ventosations of the shoulders are useful for disease caused by heat and swelling.
The ventosations of the ribs are as much as three veins from the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins.
And command the lord not to make too deep an incision, because the bone is naked with flesh, and hides nerves and arteries underneath.
The ventose (ventilation) above the buttocks is worth as many fistulas from the foundation, and diseases beneath it; and the ventose should be large and made of copper, because it needs to draw well. And in case it is subtle (thin), it would break. It causes large wounds.
The ventoses of the legs open widely because they draw blood from all over the body, and are worth ancient pains in the back, and in the testicle, and bladder, and reduce swellings.
And they are in the positions of the shoulders, and the elbows, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and bring palsy in various conditions.
The method of putting on the cupping glass is that you put it first empty, suck it quickly, place it hastily, move it equally, and do not stop doing so until you see the area turn red and inflated, and the redness of the blood appears.
Then cool it down, and apply the cupping glasses, and take care in the placement of the body, for there are some who have tender flesh and clear pores. It is necessary to cut only once, and make large incisions, and a small deep one. Suck gently.
If it isn't swollen, then it should be struck twice: The first time is to thin the way of thick blood.
And if it is very swollen, then it should be struck a third time;
And when we want to draw the blood drop by drop, we only need to pierce it once. And if we want a lot of blood, then we reward it often;
And if the swelling is large, we pierce completely and make sure that the arteries are punctured suddenly; this is for those with thick skin and hard flesh, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the sides of the veins with stimulating and dissolving oil. If it is oil of violets, olive oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of seed from a gourd:
and if it is linseed oil, watercress oil, iris oil, chamomile oil, or any similar:
And if the excess is thick and cold, take amoradine oil, or balm of Gilead oil, or anise oil, and others similar.
And if one who is to be healed has to stretch out tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be put on it, but it should be washed after the ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or water of morels, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or any similar.
And he who has much moisture should rise from asses' milk, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those with excessive fluidity rise up from old wine or sour water, or decoction of fennel or chamomile, or any similar:
and it is not necessary to bleed with a lancet before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two:
and he must not sleep after bleeding, and it is necessary that he urinate, when he needs to bleed and when he has bled.
And be aware that if the person who is healing is coleric, and he lacks temperament and is excessively inflamed; then he must take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce in moderation, and similar things; and eat spicy foods, and meat of young rooster, and moist meats.
and eat spicy foods, and meat of young rooster, and moist meats. And if he has a cold constitution, he should take honey syrup, moderately fragrant wine, which is neither old nor new, and eat little, and spicy foods and small birds and pigeons.
and on the day he will vomit, he should drink more than eat;
it is necessary to give some men three times tracle or muscatel before vomiting, or after, to strengthen the main limbs. And let the drink be refined, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink it.
The blisters placed over wounds are those placed on the liver, the spleen, gout, abdomen, flanks and loins, because these parts do not bear being cut open, and it is done for no other reason than to draw blood from one member into another, such as we place them over the breasts when a woman is menstruating.
To remove the viscosity from the limb, as we do by placing leeches on the abdomen and the buttocks to reduce it.
and alleviate pain when there is obstruction or a foreign body, as it draws out the obstruction by chance, or dislodges the arrow from its place.
and in this manner it performs when placed on the liver and the spleen where there is retained fluidity, and these leeches are administered empty to suck as little as possible. Sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this manner the leech is filled with hot or cold water to which cooked herbs such as comfrey have been added.
The form of the bladder administered to fire is as follows:
And it should be two fingers and half a palm in length, and have an opening of about one millimeter around the middle, like pushing a needle, and made of steel, soft enough before so as not to prick the patient when placed on the member.
and have a rod of steel or iron for the purpose of applying a plaster, and it should be large or small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
for the sores of children are different from those of the old and thin from those that are fat.
And this plaster should be placed thus on the member:
Take the plaster of wax or lint and place it in the plaster inside the rod that is inside the plaster, so that the light is at the bottom of the plaster so as not to burn the patient.
And then place it on the member, and your fingers should be over the wound as we have said, so that when one looks at it, if there is steam, remove the bladder.
Take a thread and repeat the suturing often, if necessary.
In the bladder given for the disease of pleurisy, in all acute cases, there should be no needle or wound, and it should not be brought unless when it is full of liquid, and it should only be placed on the member.
and this is the form:
Bladders are not brought except for members where it is not possible to place bladders due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places. And in bare muscles, as with thighs or similar;
and the qualities of the patient are such that when you find bladder stones in sweet clear waters, you can take them.
and put them into clean sweet water, until they become familiar and have no air in them; and then pierce with a vein and a bladder, then rub the member until it is red, and put the bladders on them.
And when they are full and hot, if it is a place where a bladder can be placed, put it there because it works well.
If it cannot be done, lift the area and clean it with water, then press it.
And if the limb heals too long after the body, soak the linen cloth in cold water and place it on, until the wound is dried.
And if the wound multiplies, place broken glass or similar things on it until it dries.
Or put half-peeled beans on the limb and leave them until they adhere to the limb, it will dry now.
And if you have more need of it, take other wounds.
And if the wounds do not want to take, rub fresh blood on the limb or insert a needle into the wound until it bleeds, then place them on and as soon as they feel the blood, they adhere.
And when you see that they (plural, referring to the eyes) are weeping, sprinkle a little bit of aloe powder and crushed camomile or ashes on them, and they will stop now.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear child, that the foolish man who suffers from this chapter will never see any of the old books or read any letters in them.
And because of this reason, the art (science) is alienated from our land, for I have never found anyone good in it.
And I know nothing about it (the art), except by the science of the old books that I have studied so much that I have treated it, and by experimentation, and by the custom of my life.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained within it and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought, just as I have done in these two chapters before.
Therefore, it is necessary for us to say the prologue of this book the summary of speech and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who have experience know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain occurs to anyone, it is necessary that you treat the patient from both sides, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infants, or elderly. or if the time is not very warm, or too cold;
and avoid cold foods, namely raw meats, and consume cool drinks and vegetables, do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about abscess heat or spreading of matter to the member.
if the patient returns to his first government he used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with foods that make thick broths, or they have thickness, such as cooked wheat in water, and meat of the head, and feet, and pancreas of cow, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. In prolonged nursing, the wounds break more quickly.
And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well regained or joined according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as children's bones.
but there is no healing, reset the broken bone on top of the large tendons that pierce and join the limb together, as forcefully as it was before. and do not let him at all work, and for this reason, he must be fed large meats, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are different in many ways.
For the break of the neck is different than the break of the arm or leg; I will tell you all the ways of a break in this chapter. For there are breaks that heal by growing together like the quill of a pen when writing.
For there are breaks that heal by growing together like the quill of a pen when writing. And if the break has an open wound, and the break is just a small crack.
And in every way have his device and instrument appropriate for the restoration, according to what comes to mind in its place.
And it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs when the joint is twisted and opened wide by pulling apart, and it is compressed with the press of the hand.
And when it has no twisting or crookedness, and the patient does not feel much pain, there is no breakage.
But it may have twisting, or a fracture, or a small breakage. Do not move the hand at all, but place medicines that come after here, and then hold it gently now.
Know that the breaks which grow into ulcers, and are the two parts dislocated, you must now set them equally, otherwise abscesses will grow there.
And if abscesses come close, you should leave it for some days until the abscess subsides;
Then set it equally to the muscle that you can easily and skillfully move, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration where there are pieces.
Then hold steady, as needed hereafter.
And if the bone is broken into pieces and split in two, whether it be of the hand or foot, or with one hand for small members, or by using two ropes, or with one rope and your hand;
And place the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the member are disconnected, reset them with all devices in their joints as you can, and ensure by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
Align well the two bones properly according to the best shapes.
Feel it with your hand if it seems not to be right:
If it is well aligned, do not strain it too much nor press as those who cause abscess and contraction in the member by their work, as we have seen many times.
When the member is set, punish the patient so he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way. And keep the limbs so secure that they feel no pain at all. For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it must be set in such a way that it feels no pain.
And keep the limbs so secure that they feel no pain at all. For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it must be set in such a way that it feels no pain. And ensure that it is placed correctly, so that deformities do not come when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Know that the broken members vary in smallness and in size and shape.
For there are small members such as arms and fingers and similar ones: It is necessary to wrap linen cloths that are soft and thin. And for those that are thick, such as thighs and legs:
It is necessary to wrap with a thick and hard cord, because the wide cords encase the whole large member, and restrain it evenly on all sides so that there is no gap.
Then tie light bandages around it three or four times according to the member, and hold your hand slightly on the joint, then go above the fracture and apply less pressure, so that the fracture contracts a little, then move the fracture away a little.
Soften the joint slowly, taking a large part of the healthy limb, then take another bandage and turn it around the broken limb in the opposite direction.
then return to the part below the fracture and apply moderate pressure, neither too hard nor too gently, as we said in the first line above.
Then put soft bandages of linen or cloth between the joints so they are even, then tie everything above with the bandage, and then place your splints well made on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, place a soothing hot substance on it, and who removes the swelling, leave it for some days;
then hold your arms steady, and they should be about half the width of a thick cane wrapped tightly, or a plank like that used for splitting wood, or palm branches, and in this shape:
but the arm that one places over the fracture should be a little thicker and larger than the others;
and be as long as necessary for the small or large limb; then hold your arms steady again as you did at the first stage, then tie them with a cord going upwards, as you did on the fracture in the first stage. The more narrow it [the joint] becomes, the less wide it will be.
and it is necessary that the thread be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax.
because if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their cords from twisted flax, and that is a great error, for the knots cannot be even if it is too delicate; moreover, there should not be less than the width of two fingers' space between each stitch.
And if the patient has been struck by the heads of arrows in their joints after they have been set straight in healthy ones, place linen or cotton poultices over them so that they do not become inflamed.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the bones are broken, I shall tell the cure below after that.
And know that it is not necessary to set all fractured limbs at once on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to make holes for stitches before the fifth day or the seventh, or more according to your certainty of abscess healing.
And here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twisting:
And you take flour that is kept near the mill walls and mix it with an abundance of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it; this is the common method for restoring a fracture in various ways, and especially for women and small children, as it is not too hot or too cold.
Another way of applying plaster to restore the fracture, dislocation, and sprain: Take a lancet and linen cloth and alum and asafetida and Arabic gum, mix in X quantities; myrrh and aloeswood, in V quantities; The shoulder blade (alecil) should be set back nine times; and make powder from it, and mix it with egg yolk; If the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, as it has a good composition, and restore broken bones quickly, and helps many men.
Another type of plaster for twisting (torsion) relief: Take mugwort and vismil, in nine parts; myrrh and aloes, in eight parts;\]   pois les moule et les metes en une paille a fumier; The dislocation is caused by some disjointing from its place, therefore it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned; this causes the patient great pain and injury. Break well and grind finely, boil with vinegar or an abundance of egg, and administer it.
Another way to apply plaster for dislocated joints and displaced bones, alleviate the pain that occurs, and cut away the bone, break it. Take new linen, soak it in boiled oil and water, and put it on top of the place.
This bandage does not restore [the joint or bone], but it is good for alleviating the abscess heat and bone pains properly.
Another way to apply plaster for bones that are broken and displaced: Take dried fig leaves and purslane leaves, grind them together to make plaster.
Another method of bandaging for the restoration of the fractured bone and for hastening the healing of the abscess. Take root of comfrey, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of wormwood, from each one a part;
and grind, and make into a paste with wine, and if the limbs are burned, apply to it moist coriander water or vinegar, and use.
Another method of emplastrum (medical ointment or paste) stronger than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of comfrey, flax seeds, balm of Gilead, sweet clover and witch hazel, flowers of violets and chamomile, all together in equal parts. grind, and make into a paste with salt water, sweet water or wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates wrote in his book that no other substance should be placed on a broken member for restoration except for an ointment made from beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
It seems Galen says that dry and somewhat warm things should be placed on a broken member for restoration, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of poultice that helps for injury and pain: Grind up muggath and horsehairs from shaved men or feathers of birds, and equal amounts of alum, and sieve them, and make a plaster with it.
Then wait a little while after that, and ensure the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place. If it is not dislocated for several days. But if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, hurry and dislocate it, remove the plaster now.
Take a light cloth and sea sponge dipped in water, lift the place, until the itching stops and the pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place dry linen on it, dampen it with vinegar or rose oil, and tie it up tightly until you are sure the abscess is hot.
And let the inflammation of the limb rest and the pain be removed, then begin wrapping it subtly, using a little emplastrum, and do not strain it too much as before. until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess has healed and turned red, swollen, hot, and sore, and you need plaster and linen, apply it as you did at first.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, do not remove the binding before three or four or five or seven days. And sometimes leave it for twenty days, as one sees fit, until the bone breaks and the wound heals over.
Then stretch it more than before, and make its flesh thicker, as I have said before.
If you see the joint drying out too much, know that nutrients cannot reach it; Warm it with hot moist heat every time you dislocate it, and do so three times a day, and loosen the joint slightly.
By this means, cut off the nutrients to the limb, and quickly heal what fools leave twisted.
It is bad, and it is fearful work, and I see nothing but laboring and working correctly.
There are many types of breaks, and various shapes, and the causes are intended for different things.
For there are breaks made by the impact of swords, and the collar bone fractures all the way up to the shaft which is beneath the bone, as a hacksaw or club does; and for this reason, such break is called "hackbreak".
Or if the sword strikes the bone from above in such a way that it pierces through, this kind of break is called "absolute".
And these two breaks are large or small wounds.
And if there is a percussion buried, or a cleft or shaft of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent fracture that approaches the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on the bone itself, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound is closed in the bone as thin as hair, and it is a small fracture, it is called "hairline".
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or anything similar, and it drives a bone fragment inside, and the joints are crushed as blacksmiths do on top of the cauldrons; If (something) enters into the bone.
And this happens more often in those with moist bones, like a child's head.
It also occurs in all these ways of breakage, where small pieces are dislocated, like splinters. I shall speak about its place.
And we know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the exploration with probing, and by corruption of the flesh that is above it.
The hairy appearance is known to those who, when they have uncovered the bone and rub it vigorously, make the fracture blacken.
In the treatment of a fracture, beware of the patient's condition, and if you see any unfavorable circumstances, such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, paleness, high fever, hairs appearing and turning red, and other signs in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you see no unfavorable circumstances and hope for a recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the navroz comes first to you, and it is in winter, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the start of menstruation.
And if it is in this state, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is not corrupted, and come the complications as we have said.
And if the bone break comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, you must cut open the fractured part like this:
And you are to take the head of the patient and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound make it softer than possible, and if a discharge of blood comes out when exposing the bone or an abscess appears, you should help it with what is necessary; and it is that you fill the place with damp cloths soaked in rose oil. And make the wound rest until the abscess has subsided, and ensure the flow of blood is stopped. Then begins the bone to cut out, and it is done according to two ways of work:
The first way is that you cut in a narrow incision in front, and this is the shape:
Then make another incision larger than the first.
The second way is that you have different numbers of incisions, some narrow and others wide, pointed, and made with sharp iron tools.
And work gently, so as not to cut the bone.
If the bone is hard and protruding, you must drill around it so that you can make incisions with chisels, but not cutting through the bone to the other side, and above the point it should have a margin or circle, which prevents the point from passing through the bone.
And you must have several, so that each one comes into its place on the end of the bone, so that you have trepan(s) for all purposes.
This is the form of the three kinds of trepans (trepan instruments):
The qualities for trepanning around the broken bone are that you place the trepan on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know the bone is pierced.
Then place the trepan elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut the space of the bone that is between the fractures, and do this as subtly and lightly as you can, and carefully, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand or any tool you have, such as pliers or tweezers.
Keep in mind you are not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Once the bone is pierced and treated, it is necessary to reset the dislocation that remains within the bone with an instrument resembling a pair of pliers, but it should be thinner and more delicate than other pliers.
And if there is something remaining of the small bones, or scales, gently remove them with instruments. Then treat the wound with cautery and ointments as we have said.
The other way of work, which is more dangerous, is the one that Galen described. He very strongly advises it, and this is his word. First, you must cut open a part of the bone where the fracture is visible, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place under it the head of the curved incision, which has the shape shown below.
And it does not cut completely through from one side, and the parts are sharp on two edges, so that the cutting is toward the bone;
then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly cut through the bone all around, and take care of the cloth that is below;
if it is close to the bone, cut lightly, because cutting too deeply can cause harm and fear.
If the bone does not break through to the cloth, and the bone is chipped only from above, and there are small pieces, then you must do this after roughing it up, and remove the scales with a sharp razor of various sizes, in order to make available the most suitable one for each place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
The patient should shave off large areas of hair, then proceed to finer razoring, and continue this process until it is well done.
In each of the other hair-like cuts and subtle breaks, you should bring to the surface according to its direction;
this is something not easily answered by one who has put his study in this art.
And if the wound is exposed, you should take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil and put it on the wound; Then take another cloth folded in two or three, wet it with wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do it more gently than you can, so as not to weigh down the wound, then administer it through another layer, and do not strain it any further than necessary to touch only the wound.
and leave it thus for a day or two until the abscess is soothed, then release it, and administer medicines like those of lilies, flour of wheat, incense powder, arsenic, and similar things.
and make powder from these things, put it on the wound, and administer immediate medicine without masticication (chewing).
And be careful that the wound is always clean, do not leave any dressing or pack it with bandages, for when the packing is assembled on the brain cloth, it will rot and corrupt, causing great harm to the patient.
For if you put anything sharp on it, it will burn through from above. Therefore, be careful to avoid any bad accidents happening to the patient as we have said, for it is doubtful and full of doubt.
And if blackness does not come forth except for the medicine that has been put on it, having this property, you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, mix them together with linen cloth and apply it to the wound. Then heal it in the manner of wounds that is appropriate, until it heals completely.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one part alone, because they are two bones;
And below is cartilage, and it does not break, but it does not cause swelling or twisting, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must break your little finger or thumb nail, and insert it equal to the break inside the index finger, and to the palm by the side, until the nail regrows according to its natural shape. And do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
If the fracture is in the part above the nose and the thumb cannot reach the place, you should place it equal to the top of a small rod.
If the break is between two parts, you should repair it similarly, and hurry to restore it within a day if possible.
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then apply bandages of linen to the tip of the nail if the break is in one part.
When you step on another from another side, it breaks there. and the tents be as thick that they fill the holes in the neck.
And they said any remedy that one should soak tents in butter and churn them every day. It does not seem good to me, but they should be moistened in the making of egg yolk and flour powder. Then let the tent remain until the bone is hard and the cartilages harden.
And sometimes people step on goose pen feathers instead of tents, and if the wound is covered with linen cloth, and hold the breakage, and blow into the patient. or do what you want to do.
If an abscess occurs while you are working on it, put either cotton soaked in rose oil or a small piece of camphor on it.
If an abscess does not come, apply plaster on the outside, with flour of lime and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then put light stops on it and do not bind the neck.
And if the break in the neck is small, and it breaks into many small pieces, extract the fragments with suitable instruments, then make an incision, and treat with substances that are healing such as plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose.
And if there is no wound within the neck, treat it with linen strips, and place woolen bands on it until it heals.
If the jawbone is fractured without any external wound and the break is not split in two but only displaced, and if it's recognized easily that it's just displaced, not broken completely inside, as can be seen from the curve.
It is necessary that you insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient if the break is in the right part. And if the break is in the left lower jaw, insert your index finger of the right hand gently into the opening, and adjust it with the other hand from outside, and hold it steady.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced in two places, you should provide extension to both places equally.
And if movement of the teeth occurs, or breaking, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place a broken jaw bandage on it and place a double cloth on top. Place a big bandage or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it in place where you can, and tell the patient to rest and eat light foods.
If you see that the figure changes, dislocate it the next day, and then reset it where it is changing. Place a plaster on it with milled powder with plenty of egg or flour of lime after removing the bandage.
And put a light linen cloth on the dislocation, and if it swells, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it until it heals. Often it heals within three weeks.
And if an abscess arises, apply what we have said many times.
If there is a fracture and wound together, tie up any piece of the bone that has been removed. Choose the most suitable instrument for removing the bone piece.
If the wound is narrow, expand it according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there is no more left, then close the wound, if it is wide, and apply one dressing suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it is healed.
The break is often made several times towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
or it is broken and disjointed at the second joint, and it has parts, and it is the easiest to restore.
and there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, you should have two attendants, so that one presses the shoulder where the bone seems broken. And the other extends the neck towards the part;
Then equal the break at your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor deformation.
And if you need to stretch more, put a round ball of fabric or linen on the patient under the shoulder, and it should be large according to your need. Stretch and raise the armhole, hold the ball in place with your hand, and straighten the break as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder outward due to its being deep-set, as it comes in deeply, then the patient must lie on his affected side, and place one ear against the shoulder, and push the shoulder downward, until the bone of the socket is raised.
Then direct the break at your fingers, and if you find that it is broken, you must cut over it.
Pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be joined in any way, strike it at one of the incisions you have made. But you put it under the forceps for traction.
and appears like a spoon, not concave, and be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
and it should have two arms, as you see, and one wide and the other narrow, as is the incision of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
and when you are sure of the abscess being hot, if the wound is closed, and the incision is small, or if you doubt the abscess being hot, if the wound is closed, use linen cloths and bandages, according to its size.
And if pustules become hot, soak a cloth in rose oil, asafoetida, and wine, and place it on top.
The setting of the bone, when it feels like there are wounds and sawing, is that you place on the bone the plaster made from milled powder and egg white, apply light stops, and put a sphere under the assemble if necessary. Then take a very long bandage of one palm width, then place a double cloth on top of hot iron, and apply it. Then take a thin stick of three feet long and wrap it around the bandage, so that the head of the bandage protrudes. and place the stick on the broken bone, turn the bandage around the neck, and press down healthy flesh, and press down sick flesh. and separate each part, and when you see that the bones are healing properly and it is clear that the stick does not move above the broken bone, keep it in place every day, and if the swelling subsides, hold it.
And make the patient lie down on his back, and place a small pillow under his buttocks to raise the shoulder. Align the fracture of the forearm by aligning the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck and do not untie it except in case of a bad accident for twenty days.
Then repeat the plastering, if you see that it is necessary, and bind it and leave it like this until it heals.
And it will heal within twenty-eight days at the most, and in less time for some men.
of the shoulder fracture
It seldom happens that a broken or dislocated shoulder does not heal, and it should not be forced unless by touch.
If the fracture appears according to its break's figure, and you reset it according to its natural form in all ways possible;
then put on the joint powder from the mill with abundant egg and light plasters, and place it on a double cloth. then place a broad and fine awl, a bit larger than the shoulder, and under the awl is the hollow part of the shoulder in any position; if there are no cavities around the shoulder, use linen plasters so that the awl pierces evenly.
and then hold it tightly with a strong bandage so that the awl does not move from its place, and observe the ligament every day.
And every time it breaks, hold it in place, and align the bone if it is out of its place, and make the patient lie on his side.
The shoulder will be reset within twenty or twenty-five days.
And when this number is completed, release it, and be careful, for the bone does not move easily.
And if a bone fragment protrudes before and not beneath the skin, lift it up, remove it, and do as we have said in the treatment of an abscess to cool it.
of the fracture by the wound
The arm is sometimes broken in the middle, but it happens rarely; but it often breaks at the elbow.
When it is broken through the middle, it declines below and causes the patient great pain, lack of alignment, suddenness, and occasionally vomiting blood, and the fractured bone opens widely, and it feels bad everywhere.
The restoration is that the patient lies on his back, places the cushion between his shoulders, then presses the shoulders and assembles the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and subtly align in all ways possible until the shape of the bone is as it should be.
Then place plasters and poultices over the subtle stick of salt or another light staff, and wrap it in a cloth, and hold it on the broken bone so that it does not move. And turn the rope tightly around the back, and tighten it gradually, and each hour inspect the knot, and if it loosens, tighten it again.
and if it is necessary to undo the rope, due to corrosion or pruritic irritation at the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, undo it, remove the plaster, and direct those who have come for treatment in a suitable manner.
Then reset the plaster and tighten it until it is healed.
of the broken ribs
Know that the fracture of ribs occurs only in large ones, after the back and inside the chest, and they do not bend except for when they are slippery. and it is felt well at the examination with fingers.
The restoration is that you make the break even again, as necessary. And then put a splint and bind it with a stick if needed.
And if the fracture of ribs is inclined downwards, the patient feels very great pain and shortness of breath, just like in pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lining. It protrudes with points and quickly and vomits a great amount of blood, and it is a grave illness, and they used to apply much effort in treating the old.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that distend the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
We do not let hot irons come, unless they have arrived. If they have arrived, we heal it.
And some of them said that bladders are placed on the wound, to suck it out, and it seems reasonable. Always, there is fear that the bladder does not draw superfluidities to their place due to weakness of position.
And it was said by some that one should cover the wound with damp linen soaked in hot oil and put plasters between the ribs to make the wound evenly healed, then it is cured with a cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone which does not pass through the wall, and fear is present for the patient, then it is necessary to break above the area of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put something under it to support it;
Then you must cut the bone and pull it gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And when an abscess comes to the surface, put wet linen soaked in rose oil on it and cover the area.
And treat as needed the place where it should be incised, and let it lie swabbed on the side where it is, until it becomes healed.
And similarly to the spine of the back.
And when this happens and you want to know if it will heal or not, take note if his hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel pain.
Know that it is mortal in various positions, and if they are mute and can feel when stretched or pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient should be healed if treatment is applied.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, take care if the feet are numb, and if there are accidents that are in hands, and sudden back spasms and movements against one's will.
And when it has been swabbed on the stomach, sudden movement occurs against one's will. And if it has been sustained on the back and you want to relieve it, you cannot. Note that it is deadly: Do not labor at all in its care.
If this accident does not happen to him, it will be a lighter matter.
And the treatment is to warm it if there is an abscess that is hot, apply rose oil or oil of egg yolk until it is soothed.
Then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices and tie it with a string, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where there is pain until it is healed.
And if any bone is dislocated, it must be covered with oil. Break the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound if it is large, with stitches, then heal it with soothing ointment until it is healed.
And if the shoulder blade is broken, which is called "the shoulder of the cow," push your left hand's knuckles against it and align them with the other hand as you can, then put the splint and the stick above it if needed.
Then straighten it, and if there is bone displacement, raise it, and set the bone and heal the wound until it is healed.
of the break in the shinbone
It rarely happens that the bone of the shin is broken, and if it does happen, there is only a slight reduction in the pain at the head. And they make it long, bend it toward the inside, and bring pain to the patient at the place, prick it, and swell that which is broken.
And the repositioning is such that you stretch out your hand above, while you are at the break. and know what the break and its shape is;
if the break is only in the head, then equalize that break, while it remains in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is long or bends inside, then lay the patient on his stomach so that the restoration of the fracture may be apparent to you. And when you have made it even, put on a plaster and then a splint of wood or horn, and hold the break still so that it does not move.
place the arm below the ribs, until the joint is equalized. Instruct the patient to sleep on the unaffected side or on his back.
If an abscess swells there, do not touch it until the swelling has subsided, and place on what we have previously mentioned. And then return to the restoration, hold it as required, if there is no bad incident.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is that which is between the neck and the upper arm, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of the two methods:
One method is to take a large splint, in this shape:
And tie the heads together with two ropes, and raise them up, and place the patient on a chair.
Then lay the broken arm on the splint, until it is in place, and have a curve of splint in the middle, then raise it up to some heavy object or the assistant extends it downwards.
Then put the mirror the equalizer in his hands together, until the equalizer returns as it should.
And the other way is to place the patient on his side and tie his arm to his neck, then command two assistants that one holds the broken part with his hands above, and the other holds the rod below with one cord and extends each part to its own side.
If you see that the extraction is too strong, hold the ligament beneath the break, and above the break, and extend each of the assistants to his part.
If the equalizer is close to the shoulder, then you must place the middle link below the socket and the other towards the skin, under the equalizer;
and similarly if the equalizer is towards the skin, then place the link gently, without effort, so that the equalizer is even on the joint and on the skin.
Then make the dislocation equal as it should be, and hold it steady if abscesses do not come out.
If abscesses come out, do not hold it steady for more than 7 days, and put soft linen on it with rose oil until the abscesses are calmed.
Then hold the shoulder in place, and the way to do so is that you place the elbow on the dislocation, then move the arm towards the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest.
And place the cloth, then hold the shoulder in place towards the shoulder, so that the arm is in its socket, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not dislocated.
And if you doubt that the bone is not dislocated, use a splint, and place on the dislocation a larger and stronger splint than the others, with a space of 2 fingers between each splint, and make each splint so large that it passes over the dislocation by 3 fingers on either side.
Hold firmly on the joints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter concerning fractures, more firmly and less in loosening them.
And if you see the position of the joints and tightening, as we have said, during the time you are restoring the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to heal for seven days as we have said.
Then examine every three days the wound, to ensure that inflammation does not occur or come to the place, or the pus cannot enter the member because it is too tight. If the direction, as we have said.
And if no such accident occurs, do not remove the bandage until three days or more have passed, and let the patient lie on his back, and keep his hands on his stomach.
And place a splint under the shoulder equally thick with linen, and observe every hour of the day or night that the broken member does not move, or the ligaments are not softened.
if the advice is given by the virtue of medicine, and meat is given which we have previously specified, so that the meat is initially fine. and when it begins to regain strength, it can be made thicker.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be restored in forty days in total. And then you must release it and administer baths and ointment-medicine for its alignment.
And if the structure (of the shoulder) is deformed and swollen, it remains to loosen it for several days or two months.
of a broken arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "double bones", of which one is small and it is the one that follows the elbow.
And the others [are] large, and this one is beneath, toward the small hole.
Occasionally only the large one breaks, or the small, and sometimes both together break.
When the small bone is broken, the restoration and healing are easy.
And when the large one is broken, the healing is poor, and more difficult than when they break together.
If only the small fracture has been broken, it should be slightly extended and aligned.
If it is the large bone, it must be pulled harder;
and stretch it towards the wrist, lift the thumb of the hand higher than the others, let the small one lower than the others, and let the patient lie crosswise on himself, and let the wrist be above him, so that the patient suffers no labor;
Then the ministers extend their arms to the part below the hand, or at the elbow, and another minister to the other above.
And then set the patient straight, according to its best shape.
And if there is a fracture in pieces, put each one in its place; and if any of them has slipped out, pricks the keyhole, and you cannot restore it to its place, then saw through and remove the bone, as we have said before.
And as for breaking an abscess, I have spoken about it in a separate chapter. Take the treatment.
If at the beginning of restoration, abscesses appear raw, apply the dressing made of rose oil and white beeswax, not too hard or too soft. and place the dressing gently on top until the raw abscess is soothed.
Then remove the beeswax and apply the poultice of milled powder with egg, then place the hot stones, and the stone for breaking should be stronger and slightly larger than the others.
And know that he must have 6 or more bones or arms in various positions: either the break is in one of the bones, or two.
and hold the fracture higher than elsewhere, and at all times less when aligning, as I said at the beginning of the chapter. let the bandages that are above the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough;
let the bandages that are above the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the thread, with which it is held together, be of flax, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And hold the member and the joint afterwards for some days. If any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must irrigate the limb with hot water until the itching is relieved.
Allow the limb to rest, do not restrain it.
And then continue the bandaging, and if the ligaments are damaged and the bones dislocated, or similar things, take care to do so.
And if the urine cannot reach the member because it is too narrow, so that it does not pass through, then you must soften it with a poultice for a short time, and leave it like this for some days until the urine flows through, and then bandage it.
And if none of these things mentioned above happen to the patient, do not release him until twenty days have passed.
Meanwhile, bind his hands to his neck, make his neck even, watch for movement and displacement, and sleep on his back.
know that this fracture is restored within thirty or forty days, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the remedies.
of the fracture of the hand
In the back of the hand and fingers, there are few fractures, but rather many bending multiple times.
And when the hand's plant is broken or bent, the patient must sit with crossed arms, straight and evenly positioned in front of him.
then place his hand on the extended cloth, and stretch out the broken bones with the help of the ministers, aligning them as evenly as possible until they are well joined.
And apply the plaster and poultices, if an abscess does not come, then insert a probe according to the size of the wound. And be wrapped in a linen cloth.
If the break is at the opening around the abdomen of the plant, make a ball of cloths, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken part. Then bind a long piece of cloth, and the probe should be as big as the size of the hand and bind it as necessary.
And if the fracture is on the outside, it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the limb, so that the hand is straightened and bound tightly, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the flow between the fingers.
If the break comes in one of the fingers or at the joints, if it is a nail, make it even as necessary. And bind with the hand and if you see one, insert a small straight probe to lift the break and hold it still.
And if the fracture is at another joint, such as in the index or one of the others, align it and lay the limb with the healthy digit that follows. Tie them all together securely, for motion is of value, or you place a splint on it, like a pouch does.
And be careful in the restoration and placement of the abscess heat, and care for what comes there, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one sees it when it turns forward and backward.
And the restoration is that you tie the ligament above the fracture, and the other below. The patient lies on his back, then each minister extends their ligament equally.
And this is when the break is in the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the hip, it may be one of the ligaments towards the knee, and the other ligaments on the opposite side of the fracture.
If it is near the knee, then the ligaments around the knee should be separated, and the tendons below should be extended.
Then place the mirrors the bone equal to its two hands, as it should be according to its natural shape, and then place the splint and the ligature, unless an abscess does not come forth.
And if there is an abscess, let it heal by itself, then return to your work and treatment. The ligature is made in this manner.
You must wind the bandage above the fracture and bind it firmly in two or three layers, removing any excess, then bend the leg until the heels come to the root of the knee, and insert the long thread between the calf and the leg, below the groin, and bring the end of the thread up.
Then turn towards the leg and thigh and bend it, then put on splints for the break, and place a splint on the bone of the leg.
Use soft fabric cloth of about 8 inches between the leg and thigh to equalize the binding, then begin to bind firmly for three or four times around the splint. and as you move up along the splint, gradually loosen it.
Then insert two threads that you put between the leg and thigh, bind three splints above them, then go below the top thread to the joint, until you reach the foot.
And hold it still in place so that it does not move from its position, then leave it like this, and let there be no abscess or swelling or other such thing. And if it occurs, dislocate [the joint] and reposition what comes out, as we have said many times.
and if there are bone fragments that protrude, they must be pulled out, if possible; and if it cannot be pulled out, then the limb must be cut open and the fragment removed. and heal [the wound] as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes the thighbone is broken in such a way that rods must be inserted, as in the shoulder or arm.
Nevertheless, when restored in this manner, it does not hurt the patient.
And know that the thighbone is healed within a few days or a little more or less, according to the variations of complexions.
Know that in the knee joint occurs little fracture, but it bends many times.
If it breaks, it is not really a fracture, but rather a split or piercing, causing pain at every wound and this hurts greatly.
And the restoration is that the ends which are rounded are made even with each other, until they are united as much as possible;
Then place the arm-band, and put a round stick (if necessary), and hold it as needed, then check all the positions mentioned in other broken places, such as an abscess or similar. Put to every accident whatever is necessary until it becomes healed.
of the leg fracture
Know that there are two bones in the leg, of which one is called "mastodon" and the other is called "wolf.
And a break in the leg occurs similarly to one in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the procedures are all the same. If both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
If the slender bone is broken, it bends forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well; and turns underneath.
Then apply extension, make it even, and tie the joints equally;
but nevertheless, if the break is misshapen and there are several pieces, the extension should be less and lighter; align it according to your judgment.
And when you have completed your work, take two splints of willow wood that support the leg on both sides and are as long as the leg from the knee to below;
then wrap both splints around it and bind them in the middle, so that the leg will not be able to bend to the right or left, and thus it is good;
And no one applies the bandages to the long part of the leg, and it is fastened with a rod, and they put the leg for restraint from movement, and properly done is this in the break where there is pain.
And move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident. if it is cured when it is healed.
Of the break of the bones from the foot
At the ankle, there is no break, but sometimes breaks occur in the bones of the foot and toes, and it requires certain treatment in many positions.
If there is a bone fracture in the foot break, and you see the bones pushing against each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wants to walk, and now put your foot under his, where the bones are lifted, and then press it until they return to their places.
Then place the pillar and stopper on top, and put a small table under the stomach for two hands, then pull it forward, then when you have wrapped cloths around, and other things that you may need.
And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandages, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two are broken, restore them as we have said regarding the hands. Then insert a stick broken in two across the shoulder, and it should be slightly larger, then place beneath the joint that I said, and hold it in place.
If there are two or three, or more, break them, then place a stick across each shoulder according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen cloth, and hold the joint under the arm. and remain on top of the joint above the belly of the arm, so that it is well covered.
And you must not forget the other things I said about other breaks, as I have mentioned. Treat each injury as necessary.
of the fracture of the bone in the thumb
When the natural bone of the female pelvis is broken, make her sit with her back leaning to one side and hold her from behind.
Then fill the bladder with the patient's wound linen, also as large as a bull's eye.
Then turn the woman and lift her back little by little, and then push the linen until it reaches the opening of the wound, and return the bone to its place with the bull's eye.
And when she wants to urinate, remove the linen, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or thereabouts. The break will be healed, and if you see it, take a bladder of goat's skin, attach a tube to it, and insert the entire bladder into the wound. Then blow into the tube forcefully, until the bladder is inflated inside. Nature will heal the fracture;
Then fill it with cotton, and leave it for several days until it heals.
And when the arm bone is broken in a man or woman, restore it as we have said in the thighbone;
And these fractures should not be concealed from those who study and practice this art, and read my book.
For fractures indicate in many cases the right path for restoration: Therefore, let us proceed.
In the thighbone, when it is broken, take an owl's gullet and insert the thighbone; Then wrap fabrics around it, and leave for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
of breakage with wound
for the one who has a breakage with wound, particularly if it is large, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or something similar, that it should be treated now, so that the sores mentioned previously bear witness to it.
And if the wound is healed, apply vinegar to it, if you have none else, then begin again to heal the breakage in that same hour, or on that day, if an abscess does not come.
If an abscess comes up, wait until the ninth day for it to be soothed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad incident.
And if the bone breaks and appears exposed on the edge of the wound, you must set it gently in place with light pressure and extend it slightly.
And if the extension does not present itself for you to make it even with your hands, then straighten it with this tool which is of iron, having seven or eight inches in length, and the width according to the size of the wound. Also, it is necessary for the mirror that he takes III or IV, according to what he needs in each cure of breaking.
and be round and somewhat large so that it does not bend at the compression on the member in your work, and be sharp in front, and thick from the middle to the point.
And it is called "palanch", which means that the crooked shoulders should be placed on top of the bone appearing at the head. And push it back once until it returns, and make them even with each other. If the break is subtle and the instrument cannot properly take hold of the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, so that the instrument has power over it.
And if you cannot push the bone back, as we have said, use a suitable tool to strike or cut it, be it an instrument for cutting or sawing, at your ability.
Then reshape the part that is stuck in the bone with sharpness and small scrapes.
And when the bone is set, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Make it return to its place, then wet the linen cloth in black astringent wine, and clean it carefully if it is hot. And do not put any medicine or oil on the wound that would cause rot and corruption to form.
Then administer the bandage when you have restored the bone, leave the wound open and cover it all around, according to its size, and be careful that the wound is not constricted by the fracture.
And many times have the foolish ones done this, and have brought the sick or dead upon the patient or corroded it once. And let the bindings be softer and more pliable than other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that a bad event may come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain at the site, do not put needles on it. But wrap around [it], instead of needles, hard cloth, and bind it.
And when you see after one or two days swelling at the wound, remove whatever you have put on it entirely and apply healing ointment for wounds such as tetrafarmacons and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, once in the morning and once in the evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
And the limb should be aligned in such a manner that the bone moves down gently but gradually.
If it passes many days and cannot heal but the bone keeps moving, since there are small pieces of bone, which is why you should press the wound with pressure, and remove all those dislocated pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula or any kind of corruption comes at the place, you must treat it, according to what is said in the chapter above.
And when the bone is broken and open above the member, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and similar large members, do not draw it out, for many times death comes, but leave it until it can be pulled.
By chance, (it) may happen to him after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if possible.
and if you cannot, let it be.
We often see recovery after the breaking of bones, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad sight to see the deformity of the limb. And by chance, the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Therefore be careful when we treat him: if you administer medicines that are sticky such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocola, acacia, and similar substances, take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with a sticky wine, or with an abundance of egg white or watercress. And set it on the bed in a basin, and hold it firmly, and do not loosen it for many days.
And set it on the bed in a basin, and hold it firmly, and do not loosen it for many days. Then dislocate (it), and begin another, until the nodes are removed.
or hold onto a well-made wooden piece. for the properties of wood are such that it removes all inflammations from limbs.
and if the nodes have turned into hardness, as a stone, it is necessary to remove it, by hitting it from above, and making the excess appear. or you scrape it with any shaver, until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
The limb which is weak after being set (or treated)
When the bone fracture has been restored, and remains after limbs weak and delicate, this happens for many reasons. Because one (the joint) was tied too tightly, and it was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ropes, and the nutriments could not reach the limb; porque hay mucha corriente de sangre; For too large movements, not at all in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, it is weak.
And the treatment consists of making the patient eat, and making the body thin, until the blood is multiplied in him; and give baths, and give joy and happiness;
then put the pitch on the member, so that the pitch attracts a great inflammation, and it rots often with cold water, until the inflammation reaches the member; and returns to its natural shape.
The member twisted out of health [or order] after healing When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the member is deformed, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
Do not believe the foolish who say that one should break a limb completely anew, and many fools have done so in our land.
And this practice is condemned, causing great harm, and possibly death by chance.
Nevertheless, if the knots and tortures are fresh, it is necessary to loosen them with hot water or softening herbs such as mallow leaves, roots, clover, and similar things.
And make a plaster of mollifying substances, such as darnel well does, and take the root of mallow, steep it in walnut oil or sesame oil, and apply it on top.
Take ripe figs made into a paste with wheat bran, and similar medicines that soften the sores.
And sometimes the dislocation is opened by rubbing continually and for a long time with moist hands. Bring movement to the limb every hour.
If the tortuosity is hardened and swollen like a stone, and iron treatment is needed, it must be covered up to the bone, and cut through gently with a sharp, thin instrument. And apply cushions and bandages in the care.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs to someone, it must now be reset without delay.
For if one delays, the joint swells, and there is danger of putting it back to its place;
Therefore, it is not advisable to move it at dawn when it is swollen. Often causes spasms and other pains.
Nevertheless, when this occurs, clean the patient, then let him rest until the abscesses are all appeased.
Then immerse the affected limb in warm water and oil, then gently move it, and treat each member as its treatment is appropriate in its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to feet.
It rarely happens that the jaws are dislocated outwards, and the dislocations of both can occur in two ways. or they are slightly displaced from their places and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the bottom, with saliva pouring from the mouth that it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with speech.
When a small dislocation returns with various positions.
And if it is whole and complete, you must quickly reset it without delay.
And in such a manner that the minister holds the head of the patient and pushes one of his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on two parts. And the other hand must be folded back, to keep it even.
instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions. And the mirror set even again, until it returns to its place.
And if the reset is difficult (or impossible), especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then anoint them with hot oil and water, until they can be easily reset.
Do not hide the resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset equally, and the mouth of the patient closes well, apply a soft cloth made of rose oil and wax, then tie it gently with several threads.
And let the patient sleep on his back, with his arms between two cushions so that he does not move to the right or left, nor exert himself, but take light food until the pain is removed, and the jaws are healed.
And then eat lightly whatever he desires without exerting himself to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaws are healed and healthy.
And if the two jawbones cannot be properly set within an hour and are not returned to their places, then fever and accustomed sweats occur, and possibly rupture of the stomach, and possibly vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see this (should be understood as "And if you observe it"), then know that it is destruction. and many times the person who experiences it dies within eight days.
The collarbone cannot dislocate towards the chest and ribs from the inside, nor can it dislocate outwards; however, it sometimes does dislocate, which is felt.
And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on his back, and extends his arms. then press the shoulder firmly with your palm, and it will return.
then put on the splint and bind it tightly.
and the head of the shoulder should not be dislocated. if it does dislocate again, reset it to its place, as we have said.
then put on the splint and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
And likewise, the head of the spine is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
The dislocation of the shoulder   (from the previous sentence)
Know that the spine can be dislocated in three ways:
The first way is when it dislocates at the bottom of the neck. and the second one is at the thigh part; and in case of dislocation above, it happens rarely;
do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the nerves;
often dislocate downwards towards the buttocks, especially in those who have little flesh, as it can jump out quickly from there;
in those who have enough flesh, it jumps out slightly and returns slightly.
And by chance happens to some men percussion or breaking, and swells the shoulder with an abscess hot, and believes that it is dislocated by this.
Therefore, you should test it, as long as you are sure; then begin the treatment.
Dislocations are known when they occur downwards towards the buttocks, and there is a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find obvious differences between them; You will find a hollow in the neck of the shoulder, and press firmly on top of it, as if it were an egg. The patient cannot bring his hand back to its normal position nor make any movement.
And if it is dislocated upwards, it should not be hidden, because you can feel it clearly when pressed.
This kind of dislocation is not difficult to reset when new or if the infant is sick.
The method is that the attendant raises the patient's hand upwards, then places his fists beneath it, and forcibly moves the joint upwards to its place. The attendant raises the hand and extends it upwards, then places it. It will come urgently.
If it does not come as we have said within a few hours, then the patient should be bathed in hot water. and apply a soothing and calming ointment, such as a decoction of elder and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be applied.
Then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and a piece of linen equal in size, not too soft nor too hard, should be placed under the shoulder. The hand of the patient should be held by an assistant, and the head of the shoulder should be straightened carefully, and the arm of the patient pulled out.
And another assistant holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downwards. That shoulder returns immediately, and if you see it dislocated in this manner, reset it accordingly.
and you must be present a person larger than the patient. and he should be on the opposite side of the dislocation, and push the patient's shoulder below the armpit, lift the patient's arm upward so that the patient hangs from it. and another servant pulls the patient's hand downward towards the stomach. And if the patient is too weak, he cannot lift anything heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
And the dislocation can be reset in another way:
and it is that a long needle is placed in the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is as round as a pea, neither too thick nor too thin. then it is placed under the patient, but with padding on top, and the patient should be standing straight.
Then extend the hand downwards towards the opposite form, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it does not return due to everything we have said, then do this treatment: Take a stick from two arms of great length and four fingers in width, whose head is rounded for easy insertion deep within the anus, following this shape:
Then lay the stick's head on a piece of cloth to prevent it from hurting the patient, then insert it into the patient's anus.
extend your arms over the stick, and hold the handle of the stick, with your forearm at the end of the arm, then place your hand on a stool of large width, and let your hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side. The dislocation comes now.
And when it is in, in whatever way that may be, you must place an equal sphere of wool underneath the shoulder, then apply the plaster made of milled powder, with incense and egg white, all over the shoulder and around, then hold it underneath the shoulder carefully, and twist the linen around the plaster, and bind the hands to their neck, and let them remain in that position.
It is necessary that he fart a little while the limbs are comforted, for it will heal faster.
And then move it more after five or seven days, and move it. If it is hardened and not softened, it is healthy.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture which has come or for some other reason, then you must apply fire cauterization at three points, as it is described in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this and it dislocates after seven days, and the jointure does not hold and cannot lift the arm upwards, then understand that the nerve at the base of the shoulder has been severed or stretched or softened. And understand that the jointure will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the foot and limbs, or behind, is made by force and extension of hands, and another remedy is administered.
And heal it as long as it remains healthy.
And after the healing comes swelling in the member and it gradually moves, then the patient should use baths many times until the swelling subsides and returns to its original state.
The cost of dislocation is...
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at points, and at points it returns.
and it is dislocated from all parts, both in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, for it can be seen clearly and felt. and it is dislocated according to each form or shape. And when you join the sick body with healthy one, make sure to see them clearly. For the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm nor touch its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it in the same way that an abscess comes out, for if an abscess comes out, it would be difficult to reset.
And by chance it cannot be put back entirely in all places, especially when it is at the back. It is better than other dislocations and it causes greater pain, and by chance death may come from it.
And the restoration is such, when it can be returned, that you extend your hand to both of yours; and the arms be spread, and the hands to the mirror according to the measurement around, above and below, and push the joint together at their peaks or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and bend the root of the palm that is dislocated.
and if it does not want to return to its place, then administer a strong extension;
and it is that the two ministers extend the arm and mark it with the two ministers so that it does not move in extension.
then turn the arm from each side, then when you have wrapped a double-length and wide cloth around it;
And when the doctor joins the joint with his hand, he should oil it to soften the joint, then push the joint back into place until it returns.
And when it is in its place, put on a plaster of dry ointment with egg white, and hold it in place, and fasten the arm to the patient's neck for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, remove the ligature and leave it be;
And if you see that the joint does not hold well, reapply the plaster and ligature, and leave it in this state for some days until it is firmly set. Then release it.
And if it feels pain after the reset of the joint, and it becomes motionless, wash and rub it well, and press until it is soothed. Place a fat sheep's wool on the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter water. And when it bleeds, wipe the joint gently, then place the wool back on, and then make it enter water again. And do this two or three times until it is healed.
If you see, place warm damp sheep's wool with butter on it and hold it there.
It will return to its position.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates easily, more than other joints. Immediately, it must be returned to its place, in the same hour that it is dislocated, unless the joint is swollen or there is an abscess hot.
And the resetting is that you put the patient's hand on a table, extend your fingers, and place the eyes so they are even, with the palm over the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns.
Indeed, you must look if it is in its place; Then place the patient's hand on a table for extension and resetting. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on the table, and have them put their other hand on that appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, press down with plasters to soothe abscesses, and let it rest in that condition.
And if it cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after any days, then the dislocation persists;
The patient must not move his hand as long as it is paralyzed and cannot exert any strength: Therefore know that the nerves or the arteries have been cut:
There is no other remedy but to use fire cautery for this case, and perhaps nothing else works.
And when the hand is at its place, put on the plaster as we have said, then strain it and leave for 5 days, then release and let it rest.
If it cannot move properly and there is no swelling, wet with warm water and rub until it is healed.
Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the thumb of the hand is dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or the belly:
Then place the thumb and push the dislocation back into its socket until it comes back, then hold the head of the thumb, and pull it towards the side where it is disjointed:
Leave it for two days, then equalize it on that day;
Then loosen it if necessary, as we have said, and dislocate it for a day, make it move, and reattach it after that.
And do this often, until it is narrowed, and do the same if it dislocates from the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals.
And do the same when it dislocates from another side.
And also for the dislocation of the vertebra in the back
When the vertebra in the back or neck is dislocated, and if there are multiple dislocations without any treatment, death quickly comes to the patient.
The signs are that the excretion jumps involuntarily and cannot be held, and many times a member becomes swollen, either the two knees or both arms or the head.
And many times the spleen becomes silent in four parts;
That which becomes silent at the backside is called "gilbositez":
The cure is that you inspect if the gilbositez has come from childhood: if it has not had any treatment or healing throughout.
And that which comes from falling or blows, or similar things, the old ways of healing said in great words, there was no benefit in all this.
but I have condensed it according to my intention and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the case of the gilbositez which comes in front, there is no remedy or healing.
and similarly that which comes directly to the side, and can be cured only by the one which comes at the back, as I say.
And it is that the patient should be extended on his face in a flat position and have something held under him to prevent him from bleeding.
Then stick the torch into the patient's head, on the ground, and tie a thread beneath the patient's elbows, ankles, knees, and wrists.
and two assistants know the ropes, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two torches.
And both torches should be firmly pressed as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine formed until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a board three feet long and curved at the bottom, place the patient on his side, and press the top of the board against the spine. And place the mirror on top of the other head of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place.
And if you see, do as the treadle which turns by hand. And it is that you insert two thongs on the head of the patient from one arm, and between each thong, inside and outside, there should be a palm's breadth of space.
And let each thong have the pivot where the treadle moves, and let the thongs be firmly in the ground so that they do not move.
And between each of the two thongs, there should be another rotating thong, as in gears, and have two small thongs of a palm's length for turning the treadle.
And then tie the tendon that is among the ankles towards the neck, and the other tendon towards the feet at the other neck, and each of the ministers turns his neck to the entire tendon, and the masters align the spine equally as we have said.
And when it is aligned, put a drying plaster with egg on top, then bandage, and then the cast made of a board three feet long, which takes care of the swelling and the part of the spine, then tie a rope as we have said, use the patient with gentle treatment until he is well.
And if anything comes at the end of his health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the bandage that we have said before; And sometimes they administer a piece of wood, and sometimes the appearance comes at the lower part of the spondylus (spine), and it is thought to be a dislocation. And that is the bone opening, so one should not have any presumption. By accident it may bring death.
Know that the joints of the neck and shoulder come apart only through dislocations, not like other joints.
And the joint of the neck is dislocated in four parts. Inside and outside, front and back.
Further inside it is more dislocated, but less so in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when the diseased leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased joints open wider than those of the healthy, and the diseased cannot bend their knee in fire. And it is the joint that is swollen with abscess heat, because the shoulder of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of one who comes to discharge (or expel), is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned before.
And the signs of this condition on the front part are that they should stretch out their leg according to fulfillment. In any case, the knee should not double in pain and if one wishes to make it walk, it cannot do so beforehand, and it holds back its urine, and the ankle swells up and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of one whose condition is behind (or posterior), are that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and the leg is twisted more than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The recurrences of this dislocation-like appearance are that you observe whether the dislocation is old and remains in its position without any cure. And it should not be that there is any presumption about it.
And in the one where the dislocation is fresh, and this is one of four types of dislocation, hurry up that you return the joint, and push it inward and outward, and move it left and right; Perhaps it will return on its own and does not require any other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply a strong splint and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or tie it to the thigh using a bandage. and another helper extends his hand over it in such a manner that he pushes his hands underneath the knees, then ties it with a strong bandage around the calf. and another one ties the head with the bandage;
And they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground only once, and remains hanging there.
This way of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If that does not happen, then you must give treatment for its similar symptoms.
When the dislocation is at the shoulder joint, you must hold the patient on their healthy side, then place the rope around the root of the thigh, and the limb that is under the angle (arm pit), then pull the rope upwards towards the angle, and towards the elbow.
Then take another minister (helper) by their arms, and embrace the diseased thigh's large part, extending it in a wide manner. It will return to its place now.
And this kind of dislocation is easier than others.
If you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope above the heels and knees, and the injured leg should be extended two fingers' breadth more than the other.
Then it should be suspended from above with a beam, and there should be two arms' length between it and the ground.
Then instruct the assistant to grasp the thigh and another assistant should be hanging with the patient, who grasps the thigh firmly, as the joint will return quickly now.
And when the dislocation is facing away, let the patient lie as we have said in the case of one who has gout, and pull the rope up over the injured leg properly, and also over the thigh.
Then put two hot iron rods, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert the iron rod between the thighs of the patient in the shape. and plant damp cloths around it so that it does not blister the patient, then each minister extends towards him, and the mirror puts his hand equal to the dislocation.
If it comes back, that is good.
If it does not come back, place him on a table and press as we have said in the case of gout, and make the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the sick leg immediately, and as I have said; and the mirror places his pain on top of the angry dislocation, then presses with the other hand, and stretches it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the rear, it should not be stretched down, nor lifted up from the ground, but it should remain as when a horse's harness is dislocated to the rear, as we have said in the lying down on two horses. And it (the affected body part) should be placed on its side (or flat), and the limb stretched out as we have said before, and it must be pressed against the joint on a solid surface. And the patient will extend their legs, and they should be even (level). Then adjust the thighs, place the affected leg, and tie it with a bandage so that the affected limb does not move. And rest for three or four days, then untie it, and place the affected leg again.
If you see that they are level (equal), tie it as before, and let it rest for three days.
Then untie it, and make the patient walk slowly, until the limb is comfortable.
Of the dislocation of the knee
The genou (knee) can become dislocated in three ways: that is to say, internally and externally, and backwards.
it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, then you know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all (the dislocations) is that you make the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his front, and place his foot on your feet.
then take hold of the knee with both hands, pull it straight between your hands, and bend the two sides of the knee outwardly. And another servant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he bends his leg gently at the knee.
Then apply the plaster, and hold the leg bent at the knee for three or four days, then release it.
Do not move the patient, let the limbs be comforted.
And if the limb is not present, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healthy.
of the ankle dislocation
The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
The sign is that the ankle is swollen and it protrudes in the direction where it has been dislocated.
The corrections are light, and they must be stretched gently to their hands when they are merely swollen.
And if it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit upright and hold the servant only by the leg above the ankle.
Then take the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then lift it up and push the foot up strongly.
And do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot.
if it returns, that is good;
if not, then repeat the work, because it will return.
and if it cannot return like that, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert the probe firmly into the ground between his legs, and tie strips around it so as not to cut the patient.
then the attendants mark the leg, and another attendant extends the foot to his hands or to the chain, so that it lies on the neck of the foot. Then extend each instrument equally, and place the patient's legs together close to the patient so as to hold the patient while stretching.
Then grab the dislocated joint with both hands, and another instrument hold the healthy leg below it, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, put the padding and muffler on top of it, hold it in position with force, tie the foot to the healthy leg, and watch the nerves that are above the back of the ankle, so the bindings are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bindings loosen, tighten them again.
Untie it on the third day or the fourth, and have the patient walk for four days. And if it goes towards that point, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess swells up, you must treat it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
The two [things] (or parts) When the two [things] are dislocated, they must be stretched gently without strain, and it is an easy task.
If the dislocation is on any side of the back or hip, you must make the patient sit upright on a flat surface such as a bed or table, and put your foot on the affected joint opening. Then press firmly with your foot until it returns to its place.
And when it is level and there is no opening, put a table under the foot of the shoulder, then press firmly, and leave it for three days, then release. Let it rest until it heals.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation and it is treated, many times the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the care, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, do not be hasty.
Use at first the cooling of an abscess hot, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of health. And when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, as long as the abscess grows warm.
And when the limb is in its place, then apply cooling things to the abscess, and treat the wound as needed with dry unguents.
And if there is a break in the dislocation and small bones dislocated, then set them, and do as we have said in simple diseases.
And keep away from entering into fear, as I have said, for this will be harmful to you according to your Creator, and because of the wisdom of your weapon and body.
