O you, very dear son, I have completed this book for you which is the end of the science of medicine along with its explanation, and I have made the end by its expositions and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I will complete this for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is confined in our region and is foreign to all things everywhere, the science has perished and decayed, and nothing remains of it except small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have corrupted. And from these (things) has come error and vanity, and intentions have been closed and knowledge has been alienated.
It seems to me that I should revive it along with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration and abbreviation. And I will come together with the forms of iron cauteries and other instruments of work along with the alignment of the declaration and preparation of them as necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has become distant. And one who engages in this must be well-versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to know the function of the limbs, their forms and connections and separations of them; and have knowledge of bones and nerves and marrow and the number of joints, and the movement and resting places, and the direction of their issue.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that the name is not much, but with the work it is enough. Indeed, in the art of surgery.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the matters stated, should take care to avoid making errors and not harm people.
as I have often wished for those who engage in this science, that they abandon their ignorance and lack of experience.
For I saw a mad man who cut an abscess of scrofula or a woman's neck, and he cut the arteries of her neck; because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
And I saw another madman who pulled an arrow from an old man's side, and the arrow was large; he took a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
And I had been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut it out he would die.
And I saw another madman who treated the Duke of our land who had a broken leg and with the breakage had a wound;
and the ignorant madman tightened the break above the wound with strong splints, and did not allow any callus to form on the wound, but allowed it to end in this way.
And command that he does not dislocate [it] at all;
and holds it until the leg is completely swollen and the feet come to destruction.
I am called to come to him, and I hastened to come to dislocate his leg; And when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But any corruption of the member is already confirmed and cannot be cured;
And the corruption does not cease to spread through the member until all the member is completely destroyed.
And a second eye, or other mirror, which collapses an abscess and then heats it through the malice of its lordship.
For a boil, when it is filled with black bile, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a position that all the corrupted matter can be removed.
And because of this, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: meaning, labor where there is danger in many positions;
And I will show in every place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you take care so that the foolish do not speak ill of you.
Take your weapons in your scabbard, and take care of your patients gently and firmly, and use the best way possible by the grace of God so that you may be saved and praised.
And leave incurable diseases with great regret.
And remove your weapons from that which causes doubt and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of bad disease, lest you be called a foolish healer.
"I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauteries and removing the cautery of ague, and these chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
and about the shapes of instruments, and about metal objects for cautery, and all that is necessary in work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about blisters and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
and these chapters are ordered and show the shapes of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things.
And it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the shapes of the instruments.
Furthermore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of the aid, and the harm, are the longest words and most subtle science and secret responses.
and about this they spoke often by the wise ones, and agreed on this;
And I believe little of their words, for I doubt their length.
I say that fire aid is universally used in every constitution where there is matter, regardless of the constitutions: This means hot constitution with matter and dry constitution with matter.
In the hot and dry constitution together with matter, some spoke and said that fire aid is great help; And others say the opposite: that fire cautery is not good for sickness caused by heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure a hot disease with heat or dryness.
and he who said the opposite stated that fire provides great aid for a hot and dry illness that comes in men's chest. For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you will find the body cold.
And I agree to this statement. For I have found it occasionally by experience.
And in every way, do not interfere unless those who have tested it and know through long experience the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the outcomes and timing of their ailments.
we have no fear of others' complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all mirrors agreed and conformed to the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery combined with fire is one of the secrets of cure, and of greater benefit than cautery of burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not come outside the member being cooked, and harms no other member unless named.
Burning medications come from one limb to another while aligning them, and bring diseases of severe healing to the affected limb. ...and possibly kill the patient.
The fire for its intensity and goodness of its substance does not do this if there is no excess.
I have found this to be true through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is above the truth of things.
And so I excuse myself for the length of the speech, because I do not wish to deprive you of the secret that is reserved regarding fire, and the quality of the work, how it battles diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating. Receive [it] in your thoughts.
Know, son, that they agreed on when cauterizations should be done and chose companions.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm happening beneath is brought to light by the aid of cautery. And especially when cauterization is necessary for immediate relief, except when a greater harm cannot be delayed to come upon the limb.
Do not think this way, dear son, as foolish men do. for the disease which is cured by cautery has no return. and they say this.
and they say this. But it is not as they think, because cautery is not a remedy that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors causing pain; rather, it is more effective than medicine in terms of its speed of action and the virtue of its work and dominion.
And it is possible that the disease sometimes comes according to the constitution of the patient and the nature of the disease and its properties;
and are accumulated in him the superfluidities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauterization for pain and similar things, and such pain does not return. but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, and that is so;
But they do not believe that cauteries are valuable after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any disease, and they are ineffective, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Therefore, it is worth noting that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not as the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more pliable than those made of iron, and they did not say this for any reason other than the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
and they said that the lead of the cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not always true as I have proven, and found it to be true in some men.
and gold cauteries are more pliable than iron ones, as they said. And even when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot be sure whether it is hot enough by the color of the gold, and it can suddenly cool.
and if it is overheated. it melts in the fire. And thus it has enough obstruction.
I have ordered you this chapter on the head from neck to feet, because the veins will be easier to find.
This cautery is effective for both moist and cold conditions of the brain, and it can be used to treat a disease called "soda", as well as many humors that descend from the head into the eyes and ears, and for numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and indeed all illnesses caused by coldness such as paralysis, sode (a term for brain swelling), apoplexy, and similar conditions.
The shape of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine cleansing the head 3 or 4 times, according to what the properties and age and accustomed state of the sick person can withstand. Then pour warm water over the patient's head.
And then make the patient sit crosswise between your hands, and place his hands on warm poultices;
After that place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; And where your thumbs meet, if it bleeds, warm up the cautery called "olivar," as follows: And place it on its joint marked with ink, and do so while pushing and pulling your hand little by little in twisting; then straighten your hand abruptly, and realign the joint if you see the bone protruding; and if you do not see it, then continue the cautery until you see the bone as I told you.
after take some silk and put it inside and soft cotton, and place it on the joint, and leave it for three days.
afterwards place a piece of soft cotton in butter. and leave it until the burn is removed. afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmacon" until it is healed.
And the ancients said, when the wound is left open longer, it drains more. and for this reason, it helps to clean more.
And they said that the part of the bone should be burnt as much as possible with the cautery, and then the burnt area of the bone should be reattached and healed.
And others say that the cautery should be let rest for a long time and pressed as hard as the size of the weal that women put in their eyes because the fluids are expelled more.
and the wound should be left open for a long time. afterwards it must be treated and bound up.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to be good in every case, except for some men who have fear.
and it seems to me that I should let it drain.
For the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to continuous solutions of nature, as we have testified in other members;
And in the same way, when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first sign of cautery is more healing and beneficial for me, and from this practice I work to gather salvation.
When chronic and prolonged pain comes in the head, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochineal" and purge of the head and oils and plasters. And if they perform the cautery as we have said before, it is not worth it. Take care that the head of the patient is strong and not too cold; Then cauterize below that cautery a little as we have said above. Then cauterize below each ear bone of the head as previously said, and perform a cautery at the site called "vaselz". and it is the place where leeches are placed. Align your hand so you cannot see to the bone. The patient feels more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later.
The cauteries of the ear bones should be more subtle than those used for the middle part of the head, and this is their shape:
In the cautery of the head When pain suddenly arises in one part of the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the eyes are purged with medicines, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases have been performed, but it does not help at all. Then one performs cauterization according to two ways, namely with medicine and fire.
The cauterization with medicine is that you take an alum stone, strip the bark and place it on the affected area, and then make a small incision where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the alum stone under the skin.
And when it is put back in place, if it is held well and left for twelve hours; Then untie it and apply strong garlic oil to the wound, and leave the wound for two or three days. then put a linen cloth soaked in butter on it as long as it can stay there.
After the ointment has healed.
And if you want, do as I have written in some treatises on medicines that burn or the tenth treatment of medicines that burn.
The fire cautery should be done as follows. Heat the cauterization implement with the form given here:
It is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a small box or barrel.
and put it on the painful place, hold your hand and turn the fire a little bit lightly, until half of the coal's thickness is burned.
And lift your hand so that the arteries do not burn, which are outside, and let a plentiful flow of blood come out.
Put cotton on it with linen, and place it on the affected area for three days; Then put dampened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at the tip, be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine which is not old.
Of emigraine (This line is difficult to translate with certainty due to its archaic language and potential abbreviations. A possible translation could be "from migraines" or "about migraines", but it's not entirely clear from the given text.)
When treating migraines as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries before mentioned do not suit this medicine or iron, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white.
And in the same manner, on a line half a thumb's length deep, remove your hand once, and hold so as not to cut the artery and not reach the bone;
And guard the jawbone that is closed when eating, and let the nerves have no sight but the closed one and let spasms not come to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting with great fear, especially to him who does not know, and who is not learned and experienced; let the work proceed in its way;
but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it is found in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not alleviate the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize it in the same way as we have said, and heal the wound until it heals.
If you see an artery to extract, follow the instructions for the extraction of the artery with a cautery having two blades. And this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
Of the pain of the ears due to coldness
When pain in the ear due to coldness does not improve with medications and other treatments as we have said in the division, and it persists, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", here is its form:
After puncturing all around the sick ear, or around both sides where the pain is located, move away a little from the root of the ear once you have marked the location. and have ten pricks around each ear.
After curing the shoulder when it is healthy.
Torture of the mouth
The torture to be cured by fire is not for those that move due to fever, as we have said in the divisions of disease.
And do not perform cautery on similar cases coming from scorch and from nerve spasms.
When you cure this kind of torture that moves due to fever of the eyes and purges of the head and throat gargling, it is not worthwhile, therefore you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries. One in the root of the ear, and another a little distance from the temple, and the third in the corner of the two lips.
and place the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make it cauterize towards the head of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as one finger. And let the cautery remain as long as half of the coal is burned;
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And its resemblance is like the surgeon's instrument that we have mentioned before, but it is slightly more subtle and the blade should be a bit larger.
After healing the wound as I have said before, let it be healed completely.
If apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then perform four cauterizations. Two above the two forehead bones, one at the neck, and one in the place called "wounds," as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
And treat as we have said before.
The bed for the paralytic.
To this disease, you should give the patient large years and round pills made from the brain.
After cutting off the head of the patient entirely, place the mustard plaster on the occiput which is written or treated with mustard plasters.
And this is the method for the cautery: If you do as I have said.
If he [the patient] urinates in a good manner, it is well; and if he does not, you should perform three cauterizations on the head, descending from the neck to the throat, leaving a space of one finger's width between each.
and treat as others do, and if you see it necessary, and the patient is strong enough, perform a cauterization in the middle. And if necessary, it is to be placed between the two horns, and it is to be cured until it heals;
and let the fire cautery, which is called "olivare", be as I have previously stated.
The head should be cleansed for years and as we have previously said;
After the reign of the patient's head, then make the cautery in the head and on each horn, and twice on the spine of the neck;
and if you have further need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is outside, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; let it remain until the deeper part is burned, and lower your hand. After the treatment when the patient is healed, apply the cautery that is called "olivare" as we have said before.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cauteries except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to cleanse the brain with years and other treatments as we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
And if it's an infant who cannot tolerate it, give a gargle and chew soft foods frequently with good meats.
After the king's head has been boiled, apply the cautery as we have said before on the head and on each horn. If the patient is strong and enduring, apply cautery as I said to someone with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and the neck, and let it be the "olivier" cautery as I have said.
If the patient is an infant, apply a subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to melancholy are the superfluidities or corrupt and swollen fluids, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for those who have paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is the superfluity declining towards melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give them to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what has been said before in the division.
After the king (or head) of the patient. Make a sling from linen well made, like a circle, place it around the head (or neck).
and cross the patient over himself, holding him tightly from all sides.
Then apply the linen bandage, using old goat's butter. Heat it moderately, so that it is hot enough to be pressed onto him without causing pain. After emptying the circle inside the head (or neck), let it cool.
Do this to the patient every week with good government, until he is well.
Or, if you wish to cauterize someone, make multiple pricks all over the cauterization implement.
This method of cautery reduces (or relieves) the skull greatly.
And then place cotton wool moistened with butter and linseed oil on it.
Of the eyes When the eyes begin to come first through the signs that I have said in the division, then commence and give the patient something purifying the head, and keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath several times while fasting.
Then tell him to lie down on his back, and make a fire-cautery in the head, and make two more cauteries on both temples where the defect of the eye or the eyes is, or one defect is in one.
And apply the entire cautery to all veins and arteries that are beneath the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple.
And beware of the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it with your power as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in making incisions with caution, how to stop it.
And sometimes they make a cautery or a hot iron under the two rear bones.
And one sees that it is due to cold, fluid effusions; therefore, you shall perform the cautery that I have mentioned at the beginning of this chapter draining them: Cauterize the head, and perform cauteries on both sides of the temples, and cauterize where there is pain beneath the bones; If necessary, also cauterize carefully above the eyelid with small cauteries.
When the medicine, as we have said in the division, does not work, then give the patient three warm cocktails. After the king's head (another name for the swelling), perform a cautery or a mild olive oil cautery. Perform two cauteries called "clavilis" above the eyelids, a little below the hairline;
And beware of the artery that you do not cover.
And here is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then perform the cauterization using this implement called "olivar. This is the form (of the procedure):
If you wish to perform this fire cautery on the two warts as long as they are, like serpents;
and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that pricks the oil Sometimes the hair of the eyes is converted into a gland and pricks the oil, and then one performs a fire cautery according to these two methods; it means by fire or burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and even, then put the patient in a healthy state. On top of the paper, draw a figure similar to the fennel seed cluster and mark the beginning of the sign along the hairs.
Then put moistened cotton in egg white and ground pepper oil on it, then heat the fire cautery of this shape:
Cauterize at the figure you have marked several times, until the edge is burned.
And the signs of the operation's health are that you see the paper recede and the hairs lift at the oil's tip.
Then lower your hand and let it rest for three days, then place moistened cotton in butter until the burn is healed. After the ointment treatment until it heals.
And when hairs appear, and the paper is softened then start the cautery on that same spot again, as you did first.
And if the hairs have fallen off, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place and is even, and the hairs do not prick the oil.
The medical cauterization is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a paper in the shape of the myrtle leaf.
Then take French soap and quicklime, one ounce each and grind them together well. And make it quickly, so as not to cool it; then place the paper over the eyes. and if the patient holds it only in one eye, it should be treated in that one; and if in both, in both as well. and put cotton soaked in egg white under the eye.
The patient's shoulder should be in a good position and place your hand on the medicine showing upwards, and press the thumb and move it every time the patient feels the bite of the medicine, because it bites as much as fire.
When you have done this for a while, remove the medicine from your hand. And when the bite has passed, raise the shoulder and look to see if the paper is raised as it was by the constraint of fire or by an incision. And if it is thus, it is well.
If that is not the case, reset the medicine on the place or the medicine has not worked yet, as long as your efforts are equal and your eyes placed correctly;
Then put cotton wadded in butter on it until the wound heats up, afterwards cure the place of the ointment called "diaphanis" and other ones, until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful about your work, keep a great distance from the eyes so that no medicine drips onto them.
And if the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, start the treatment again on that place which was made soft by the paper properly, just as you did before; Afterwards cure it until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the fennel seed.
Know that human eyes are diverse in size and smallness, according to your constraints;
And the straight path should not be replied to him who studies this art.
Treatment of a fistula by cautery
When treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases and your treatments do not help, then you must perform cautery on it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap; And the assistant should grasp the patient's head between his hands in such a manner that it does not move or lower its head.
Then place cotton wool soaked in egg white or linseed oil on top of it.
After heating the iron branding tool that is metal.
And press it against the head like the shape of a plumb bob, with the hot iron branding tool at the same time;
If it is seen, let it be pointed from one head to the other, and if it is seen, let it also be like a tent.
However, this which is placed at the head is moved for your work.
After you have compressed the fistula if it is open, and drain out the pus, then dry it. And if it is closed, open it, and draw out the pus forcefully;
Then place the hot iron cautery on it, and hold your hand on the cautery at the base of the nail so that your hands do not move. And put the cautery in the oil fat, and corrupt it.
If you come at the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If that does not work, repeat the cautery again if you need to, and leave it for three days;
Afterward place cotton wool dipped in butter on it, and the ointment of the desiccative cure until it is dry, and if forty days pass and it is not dry, put on a corrosive medicine while the bone is exposed. And the king in accordance with what he will come to write in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula which none of the ancients spoke of. Make an opening for the fistula and cut into it; Afterwards put in the fissure the camel's hair fine as this is its shape: and they fill it with the quantity of a half-pound of pitch. Hold your hand firmly on the camel's hair, and let the patient not move at all, until the pitch melts over its oil.
And it is necessary to anoint the patient's affected area with oil and soft cotton dipped in egg yolk or almond oil.
The flesh should be cut open where there is a fistula, and the pus drawn off by a marvelous health.
And if the fistula has been healed by the cautery we have said, it is good. If it's not healed, then administer pepper to the newborn, and bring the fistula back into the newborn's body as appropriate in its proper place.
cavities in lips Many times there appear cavities in lips, which are called "hair," and also in children's lips.
When you treat these cavities as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then boil a small cautery knife using this form:
And apply it immediately into those cavities until it reaches the source.
After treating the wound with cerote (medieval antiseptic) until it is healed.
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or eye, or nose, or teeth roots, after pus production and swelling and becomes a fistula. And you cure it as we have said in the previous section, but it does not improve. Then it is necessary to use cautery according to the size of the fistula. After the blow or loss of the fistula, hold your hand until the iron is hot at its source and at its base.
And do this once or twice, after treating what we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
and if it is healed thusly, it is good. And if not, you must discover the source and remove the corrupt bone, as you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine but it is of no use, then put the head of the patient on your lap. After heating the cautery as will be shown later in this manner: you place a cane on the tooth.
Place the hot cautery inside [the affected area] as quickly as possible, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth.
After leaving your hand, continue with the cautery according to your will.
Fill the patient's mouth with saltwater and keep it there for an hour and a half.
And in this way the moving tooth is confirmed, and the softened gums are held tight, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
From the pain of the teeth
If dental pain comes from cold or there is cold or fever, and the medical cures do not work, then it is necessary to use cautery according to two methods: and the cauterization with butter and the cauterization with fire.
The cauterization with butter is as follows: take butter from a cow and mold it into the shape of an iron spoon or ladle. After taking cotton and wrapping it on the tip of a tent, and moistening it in bull's bile, place it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it is cooled.
And do this often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see the cotton and linen moistened in cold bile, place it on the swollen tooth, and put the hot iron on it until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
The cautery with fire is such that you take a thick iron or steel cane, and it should be large enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
After heating the cautery, wait for its shape to come after it, and place it on the tooth, holding your hand until the cautery is cooled.
Do this often, for the pain will disappear from that day itself or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then blow hard.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And make a cauterization at the head that you wish, and according to what you are able.
And this is the form of the cane:
of scrofula When scrophulas are of fluid and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery as described below, and have it open so that the smoke can exit to the other side of the cauterization.
And place the hot fire cautery on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
And if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; and place moist cotton on it with butter until the pus is expelled;
After the wound has been cured with ointments and plasters, make sure it is healed.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the intestine, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient must be purged first with soluble medicines;
After the cautery is applied to the root of the throat, be careful not to approach the throat, and do it with caution but only a little bit;
Afterwards, perform the other cautery at the joint of the neck at the spine's head, and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle," as we have its shape beforehand.
and heal the joint as we have said before until it is healthy.
When all and disease of parmon are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or scorching, and it is an old disease, perform two cauteries on the swelling in visible joints. And another cautery in the worst area between the two breasts.
And it is the cautery called "clavicle," according to the shape that has been said before.
And if you see, perform cautery by pricking with the entire cautery called "point" as its shape is described in the disease of ears.
And let the tips be up to 30 [degrees], or around [them].
After curing the joint as stated before, let the cautery be at three intervals according to this form:
And because these cauteries are lighter, because you make them in two applications (copies).
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards let the patient lay down on their back and side; afterwards, take hold of the curved part with your left hand thumb;
and if the joint is dislocated internally, cauterize it using the double pronged instrument that has this shape here:
and cauterize the wound until it pierces the chest cavity, causing the figure of the cautery to come together with four cauteries;
and this is done by using a three-pronged cautery because the figure of the cauterization consists of several cauteries;
and the nerves are arranged according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of the three-pronged cautery;
And sometimes, it is tied on top of this nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
After place the cautery over it, grind with ashes. After placing the patient, let not the limbs be moved for a long time until they are well comforted.
If it is dislocated above, which happens seldom, then perform cautery above the thick part of the cauterizing iron, or many cauteries in pricking.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach there are coldness and much moisture which bring it to its constitution, and many catarrhs come upon him, and in the ways of treatment customary for him, it does not help; therefore, the patient should be made to lie down on his back, and extend his legs and hands. After that, make three cauterizations beneath the spoon-shaped depression in the amount of one finger width, on all parts of the cautery, and two cauterizations outside the two sides so that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and leave enough space between one and another so they are not joined together when they release pus.
and the cauterizations should be so deep that they pierce the two parts of the wound, and the figure of the cauteries according to this form without deviation:
And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery within the stomach according to this form;
and he who has fear of the cautery, cauterize by pressing and holding on the stomach at the point according to the quantity that you wish. then cauterize all the cautery which is called "points".
After the healing of the wound has occurred, when it is healed.
When it comes to the liver, there is pain from cold and moisture and a great windiness, until it is removed from its natural composition due to excesses. and the patient is cured of what we have said in the previous sections, but it does not help him at all, it is necessary that the patient be conscious on his bed. and make three cauterizations according to this form, this shape, and this quantity on the liver, pushing aside the hypochondria, where the ribs of the man come.
And let there be space between each cautery, the thickness of two fingers. Let the cauterization be long enough to accommodate a finger and do not press too much with your hand on all the cautery.
And only burn the middle part (of the wound) and let the patient be upright on his feet;
And if he cannot stand, he should lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms.
If your desire is to perform these cauteries with a scalpel, be careful and cautious in the art, and do not burn all the way through, because you will scorch the entire body. And let it not go up to the boiling point, because the core is very subtle there, and the wise one can see.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not very strong;
and if it is in the membrane, he feels insane pain.
And when this cure ends, it is necessary that the patient be conscious of his head.
and then press on the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a plowshare, such as this is its shape: Heat the cautery until the blades are hot, and come to a boil, so that the pus is completely expelled.
after the cure according to the cure for swellings, until it is healed;
It is not advisable to use this fire cautery by anyone who has not studied the art of medicine for a long time, as these diseases have been aggravated on many occasions by it.
Then it can be boldly operated, but I think it is worth leaving it alone.
the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients said that plasters made from the roots of Aristolochia should be applied in this manner: Take a long root of Aristolochia, the largest one you can find, and let it be dry, as large and as long as your thumb. and moisten it in oil, heat it, and apply the fire cautery between the armpit and the neck, and place small cauteries a little lower in the area below the beard.
and the cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, sloping slightly back. And the incision into the worst part, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and the two ribs outward from the incision between the shoulders.
And do not press your hand, but make it open in the same way as when smelling.
And some old man said that anyone uses a cautery resembling a razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess. And he jumps beyond the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies immediately, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse (as we have said in the divisions of cures), and it does not help, then apply three methods of cauterization, all of which are good.
Of which one method is that you make three or four incisions, in a line following the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery we have said before.
And after that do not rush your hand with all the cautery, let the patient be aware on his back.
And another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation.
and lift the incision that is towards the mouse, where the patient's pain comes from on the left side, and raise the elevations as you make the incision according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After that put the two nerves into the flame until they are heated and pierced from the other side, then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four [pieces].
And if you see, cauterize entirely with the cautery at three nerves.
After it has poured pus for a long time, and this is good that the other of the said treatments be applied next.
Cauterizing does not help for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes.
When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in the divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, one above the stomach, one above the liver, one above the bladder, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the worst place. and let the cauteries be close to the swelling of the cure.
After leaving the cautery open for long periods to let pus flow out, do not neglect the treatment of the patient after the cautery. And healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be united with the help of God.
The shape of the fire cautery for the stomach is the clavicle that we have previously shown. And it for the back is oleander-shaped, as it is described before.
When the feet are swollen in those who are edematous and full of citron juice, it is necessary to apply fire cautery on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger. And immerse your hand with the cauterizer without turning.
And do not go too deep, otherwise the yellow liquid will flow out forcefully; and let the cautery be of this shape:
After doing two fire cauteries in each leg, at the tip of the big toe. And let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg;
leave the cauteries open for a long time without healing, because it helps the juice.
After the treatment of other ailments as we have said.
When inflammation of the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and retentive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are blocked and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong nature, make a large fire cautery on the stomach as mentioned before (cautery of the stomach) in the circular cautery. and three fine cauteries around the belly, subtle cauteries all around, and two cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, do a cautery on the joint, and one cautery on each isle, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the cure for hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are on the foundation, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as mentioned in "divisions", but it does not help, make cauteries. III at the base of the spine on the back, that which is completely dislocated above Almecgate little by little in a triangular shape, and the fire cautery below the hump should be applied.
If you think that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and his face swells, then the large fire cautery should be applied on the stomach as stated before, and another one on the liver, and another one all over the spleen with a sharp-pointed cautery. leave the cautery open for a long time. After curing the shoulder when it is healthy.
When you cut Althelul, if the cautery resembling a razor is heated, then put it all over what you have cut. and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, so that the wound does not close.
Do this once or twice, and if there is much swelling, cauterize each one as we have said. after the cures of useful ointments while they are clean;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alum, it will have more help.
If the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will describe in its place, this disease comes that can only be healed by cauterization.
If any abscess comes, and it is filled with pus and corrupt moisture, you must test the entire tent (or cavity) with extreme caution, and ensure that you understand the entire extent of the corruption.
After heating the cautery which seems like a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that it has entered, and continue the cauterization until the flesh boils and corrodes, once, or twice, or three times, according to the amount of sore needed.
And beware not to burn the nerve that is within them, and the great veins.
If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, beware of these places, and do not do anything foreign except in a charnel house, and think that it is not safe.
After healing the place until it is healed, and if the place is ulcerated and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed.
and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is rotten, and the bones are destroyed. And similarly as one of these we will say in its place.
When cold pain comes to the eyes and from strong wind and does not take on a female form, then you must perform cautery on the eyes on both sides with the cauterizing iron as we have previously mentioned.
And if we cauterize it with hot metal, it will have three cauteries in a row, and they will do more good.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and soft due to coldness or moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a cauterization in the area outside of the bladder where the pubic hair begins, on both sides, each cauterization being as long as one's thumb.
and make the cauterization behind the back, if needed.
and let the cauterizations be shaped like a nail as previously mentioned.
When the womb is cold and moist, it does not allow conception to take place, and the flowers are corrupt and their terms are delayed. And when they come, they feel great pain: Then it is necessary to do three cauteries around the boil, as we have said, or the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back.
and let the cautery be with a clamp, as we have said.
When the viscous humors descend into the bladder and hence move from its place, and this is shown by the fact that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and the location of the departure is found, it is necessary to cauterize the patient above the bladder at the cautery similar to a circle, and mark the spot in front of the location around the bladder so that the bladder is within the circle.
And if [the fire cautery] is similar to those from which the stomach has been cauterized.
If [the fire cautery] is not present, make three large olive oil cauterizations, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others.
And heal it until it becomes healthy.
Of the pain of the haunch When pain occurs in the abdomen of the hernia, and it is caused by coldness or moisture, the patient is treated as we have said in the previous section, but the treatment has no effect, and the illness is chronic. Therefore, you must purge the patient of gross humors using foul-smelling pills or other good-looking pills. After that, make a cautery.
And the manner of the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say with burning substances and fire cautery.
Fire cautery can be done in various ways, one of which is:
You shall apply fire cautery on the boil of the hernia. Three triangular cauteries according to this form, make a good and deep incision and wide, with space between each cauterization equal to the thickness of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped.
Sometimes a fire cautery is made in the middle on the hernia's head, for which there are four according to this form.
And if you see, cauterize with the circular cautery as we have said earlier in the dislocation of the hernia.
But do it in such a manner that the circles encompass the entire hernia and all its thickness is burned.
And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the haunch and does not reach either the thigh or the leg.
And if it comes up to the thigh and the leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain is, and four on the ankle, three-quarters of an inch on the left side.
And let the cautery be a cutlery, and let the thickness of the coal be heated.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends to the thigh or near it, cauterize it three or four inches with a cautery called "poins". And if necessary, make more of it.
And if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, cauterize with a cutlery or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries that you do not let the cautery burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
I myself have seen more who made a cautery above the ankle on the foot and allowed it to remain until the leg swelled completely and the toes also, and they were pierced and corrupted all the toes. After a stomach solution, he died.
If the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on one and the other, according to this method.
And the wise men say about the cautery of the ankle, in this way, make a nail as thick as a little finger or a bit smaller, and between cross-pieces or from one crosspiece to another of a space equal to the size of a nut.
And the joints above the two parts should be over the bones, and they should be like knuckles, and it should have one iron handle well made.
and this is its form:
and let it be scorched until they are all red and blistered, and then place it upon the patient's sick side, and turn it on the healthy side.
and let the fire cautery be applied once, and leave it for three days; and then apply a plaster of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time. after the treatment with salve until it is healed.
Al-Zahrawi says that we should not use this cautery too much due to fear of its gaze, and few people who use it.
And indeed, this is one of the good cauteries, which can endure it, and there where he feels it.
The medical cautery is made by heating an instrument between the joints, and it should be of iron or steel with a long shaft, and at the top have two arms, and between each arm, the thickness of a finger joint. And they are open on both sides and above, and they join together in this way:
After placing the iron device on the patient lying on the sick side, put your hand a little above the iron device. After pouring the hot liquid between the two circles of the heated iron and letting it sit for an hour, let the patient endure the heat and burn of it.
It burns as if with fire; [or] It bites like fire.
And when the biting [pains] have passed, place your hand with the tool and gently lift the blister from below, leaving it so for three days, and apply butter until the blackness of the burn is removed. and leave it for three days to draw out pus.
And this will be the last aid after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that burns like the blister as you did in the blister [treatment].
This is the method of hot water, and I have written or treated it regarding the correction of medicine. Take quicklime and hot coals, equal amounts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot. If there is a small opening exposed, let the point of a finger enter it.
If there is a small opening exposed, let the point of a finger enter it. Then remove that pot with another pot well weighted down, and put on top of it alum and salt and soft ash until there is enough powder above for you to grasp hold of it with your hand.
and leave it so until it dries up with ash and heat or sinks down or is weighed down, then take all that ash and throw it onto salt and onto alum as before.
And afterwards, it will become very dry and be administered in the service of medical work and in cauteries for other limbs.
For it performs the same work as fire, and if used with other medicines from which you cauterize a boil like this, with honey, acacia, salt with soap, all these things mixed together.
Galen tells us of a cure by which a nobleman was cured of the pain in his leg and sciatica, and he praised it highly, saying that no other cure was made for it, and that it was cured once when this cure was made, and he was bathed as he instructs below.
And he says in this way that you take the fresh and dry green litharge powder, grind it very well with a bit of fat, and put it on the wound (sores) and on the thigh and on the leg where there is pain, and hold it there.
And let it stay for three hours and in the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
And then make him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed up, and let him lie in it, and the pain will leave completely and he will be cured.
Know that no one should use such fire cautery medicine unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat horns, it helps a lot.
The cautery must be done in this way. Take linen and beat it with old oil, and put it on the depression that is between the toe of the foot and the one called the foscile.
Take dry goat horns, heat them until they are charcoal, and put them on flax (linen), and leave it there until it becomes stained.
And fix again thus, and continue to do so until you think by feeling that it comes to the bone, and that the pain is stopped.
This method of cautery is called "cautery of goat.
Of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether it be from falling or impact or too much evacuation, or like the effects of cold matter spreading, none of these symptoms call for cauteries, except in the case of cold matter infusion.
Afterwards, it is necessary that the patient is emptied of putrid pills or similar, which are made on the back, where the pain is, three lines marked with incisions, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can tolerate.
and the cautery should be done according to the cautery called "point.
If you see, make III or IV cauteries at the intermediate cautery in this form:
Often this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrow anus when they strain, and fear. and you find it in the lower spine of the back and in its appearance which comes above the other spines.
When you see this and wish to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this shape. The cautery increases each part of the spine.
And if you see, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointed at intervals of 2 or 3 lines and let the points be close to each other.
After healing the joint when it is healed according to what we have said, ensure that you do not apply caution in a sciatica state that is in the nerve.
"of the pain of the joints"
When joint pain is due to moisture that affects all members of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which are called "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cures with medicines cannot be cured, it is cured by cauteries in this manner:
make a mold for the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary to prick on the thigh, let it be cauterized all over with the cautery called "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which happens often, make fire cautery on each knee three or four times on each side, using all olive oil.
and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand beyond the burnt part.
And if the pains descend to the genitals and back, administer the fire cautery as we have said in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make incisions around the wrist two lines deep.
and if there remains a point of pain in the elbows, make incisions above each joint and on the hair of the hand.
And if the pains come up to the ribs or shoulders, cauterize each part and take good care of the patient, considering the medications.
For if you take good care of him and purge the fever, he will be healed with God's help.
When rot begins in wounds, and the bowels descend into the joints and it is newly formed, then, when you see it to be cured, it should not eat that day; and use things that relax the stomach, so that the bile descends from the stomach;
after doing so, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to bear down on his anus until the bowels are repaired, and then remove them to your sides, and press under the wound on the bone of the fist, and at every sign that is similar to half a circle above the chest;
then heat the iron in the form as follows:
as long as it is white and it exudes pus. Then pull out the bowels to their place; And the minister presses his hand so that it does not return.
Work the thighs well on the patient, and put the cushion and the sergeant beneath him on the thighs, and another one to hold his hands.
Then put the cautery on the spot with your whole hand, hold it straight and keep holding until you reach the bone; if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you reach the bone. And be careful that the boil does not burst when you are doing the cautery. do not burn it. and so that the patient may not die or suffer harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
The cauteries for children should be subtle according to their size, and those for large people should be as big as them.
After three days, treat the shoulder with the boar's fat until the burn is healed.
Treat with other remedies until it is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for 40 days, so that the wound heals well.
And it is necessary to let his excrement be delayed for a long time, so that the boils do not protrude when he gets up to go to the rooms.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, bring him a well-made sheet and keep it for 40 other days.
Let him have rest, so that he works little and is careful not to overfill himself with drink or food, and not to laugh too much.
And when he performs this teaching, he becomes completely healthy.
And I shall tell you next about the treatment of amputation in its chapter.
If roundworms appear in other wombs and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then you should perform the cautery of the cautery according to their quantity, and burn the third part of it. after the treatment as we have said.
and none of the old ones have said that it should be cauterized at the three-cornered cautery in this shape:
but first mark the place of entry and make a line above the worm, and another below, and then press your hand on the whole three-angled cautery.
But the first cauteries are lighter and more movable.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, either from falling or being hurt, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medicine cures do not help, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its virtue and location for twisting and its pain.
if he is healthy after the first cautery, it is good;
if that part, repeats the other cautery on it, because custom is that it should change to the member that is nearby, so you must do the cauterizations as many times as the patient is getting healthy.
These illnesses are sometimes helped by cautery with great effort, and especially the diseases that come from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
Can you see the patient to perform a fire cauterization, take care if the patient is at the beginning of the illness, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and he neither sinks nor remains; if you doubt that corruption may affect the entire patient, then perform V cauterization on the head. I hold the head to me and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairs. And (I) on (them) over the two horns, and (he) behind the nape.
And leave your hand thus that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the bark comes out of it so that the vapors of the large humors can escape.
And apply the fire cautery on the swelling, as described earlier.
If the measles have spread everywhere; And it loses [the dislocation] clearly, so you must burn with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery is the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one great one on the crotch and another small one, and two on the two shoulders; And two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the thighs, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
And protect the nerves that are under the last bone, so you don't burn them;
And sometimes make one cautery on the bone of the handle, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver;
And know that when you do more of the fire cautery, more aid is done, and it benefits them more;
And know that patients feel no pain from the cautery as the body is already completely corrupted.
The cautionery should be deep and shallow according to the members and joints, as you will find in ways of using irons.
After curing the shoulder with flour and honey, and other treatments until it is healed.
When a swelling appears in any member and is cured with medicine, oil, and plasters, but it is not healed, then cauteries are done on the member according to the size and smallness of the member;
and let the cautery be a slight incision in the flesh. then heal it with ointments until it is healed.
And sometimes they perform a cautery on the hand, foot, and back, at the nerve endings that paralyze the member, and in this way the swelling is removed.
And no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the movements of the nerves guiding the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is developed, the instrument of medicine is of no use, therefore cauterize with a shallow cautery to the extent of the deep burn until the white spot is removed and its color changes.
Then cure with flour and lentils with rose oil and banana leaves, blood of the colon and blood of the almond, each in turn. And mix all together, tie it up with a cloth, and apply to the place until it heals.
treating canker with cauterization
When the boil starts and you see it begin to spread, if you want to stop it, you should cauterize with a fire cautery that resembles a circle around the boil.
And wisely, they would say that you perform a cautery also in the middle of the boil;
and it seems not good to me, for I believe it should not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have often seen this happen.
and it is more proper that it be cauterized around, at the cautery called "circule", as we have said in our discussion on cauteries.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to heal due to its excessive nature or due to the age of the patient when they are already weakened (meaning too old) and have little blood, or due to the time; And you see it hasten to measure: Then cauterize it around with small hot needles by pricking. After that, let it be in this state. It will heal.
And if you see it pierced entirely with the fire cautery, heat the cautery as shown here:
Place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the core, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them outside in such a way that the course of the pus is made more evident.
After the cure until it is perfectly healthy.
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than the consumption of a limb, as it corrodes them as fire dries up wet things.
If you see this disease in a place that can endure cauterization along with fire, then heat the small and large needles accordingly according to where the disease is.
After that, cauterize everywhere until all the corruption is reached and there remains nothing of it, so that everything that is corrupt is removed.
And then leave it for three days, and apply soft soothing cauterized with oil on the wounds from fire and all corruption.
After the cure of onions producing charcoal.
And if after three days you see charred flesh not growing, it is good;
and if that does not happen, then cauterize again on the remaining corrupt parts.
And this wound has sometimes been healed with medicinal juice instead of fire cautery;
But nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment with medicinal juice in the section on treatment; take it when you need it.
The coming pricks to the feet Very often a disease called "closed" (according to our understanding) arises from the feet, which is a large thing swollen that presses on the foot.
And the cauteries of this disease are according to two ways. This is to know fire cautery and water hot cautery.
Heat the fire cautery in the same way as a feather from a goose is heated, and it should be made of good iron to the size that it can penetrate the nail completely, and that it has fine edges;
After putting it very hot on the nail, turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the root of the nail; and leave it in this way for three days until it begins to emit pus; Then make a plaster of evil savage herbs crushed with oil, and leave the plaster on it all night, and the nail will shrivel and be uprooted from its roots.
Then heal the shoulder with soothing salve until it is healed.
And if it has been converted by the outside of the body, and this happens in many cases, whether on limbs or feet, then you must apply a hot cautery. And it happens in this manner: Take a cable of iron or wood, or a feather from the plume, and place it on the nail and the alcohol, that is to say, for treating warts. place the cable around it so that it surrounds entirely, then put some hot oil on it and hold your hand well, press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cable comes to the base of the nail, and may find the hot oil deep enough to the root.
let the patient suffer a little bit of the hot oil bite for an hour; then leave it like that, and it will fall off with all its roots.
Thus, do after another, as long as you heat all those who are in the body, then cure them with ointments that soften flesh.
When some tremble from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or something else, it is necessary that you make four cauteries, or four on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra. and the cautery for the genitals, and the olive oil cautery on the stomach.
let him tremble, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
Sometimes on the outside of the body appear baths, or pustules rotten, which come from large corrupt matter.
it is necessary at first when they appear that a cautery be made over each head of the boil: a subtle cautery made from the branch of the myrtle, so that it may be gripped by fire, or from the long root of arum lily, or to the lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when it appears in this way, and they cannot grow from then on, but the superfluous parts that come from it are broken off, and they heal.
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Often there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut at the wound which penetrates through, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things. And it is a very bad thing to bleed internally.
Furthermore, when this happens to someone, hasten to place your finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the blood is stopped from flowing out beneath your finger, and no more blood comes.
Then place the olive oil cauteries, both small and large, until they are all red.
Then apply the hot cautery to the affected area, taking care to avoid large blood vessels, and hold the cautery in place until the flesh has been burned through.
And if a jump occurs when you place your hand on the vein, and the fire cautery is extinguished, take immediately another cautery that is near the fire.
And continue with one procedure after another until the flesh is seared.
And ensure that you do not burn the nerve and that no further harm befalls the patient.
And understand that when the flesh separates from an artery, it cannot be properly cauterized if the artery is large, unless one of the four methods we have mentioned is used. or by cautery, or by extraction when not treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to stop blood. and tied and constricted as necessary.
Whoever brings about the constriction of a narrow ligature or placing hot things on it, or similar things, will not benefit if it does not help.
And if this happens without a mirror or medicine being present, then he should place his finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tighten it firmly until stopped above the wound and the vein. and it must not be moved, but the wound should be often moistened with cold water frequently so that the wound becomes very cold, frozen, thickened, and stopped.
and make inquiries ahead about those who need cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which fire cautery or hot medicine is needed, and the types of eyes [cauterized areas], their causes, instruments, shapes, and forms of the cauteries.
And I have placed that chapter up to the feet and will proceed in this chapter through the same path because it is easier to find what we are looking for.
And so as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this, greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things. Where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you to not undertake folly. For many ways of men come in treatment. If those come who sicken themselves so much with their disease that they die quickly due to the fury that their illness brings, and the great severity of its malice; And one should fear such things.
And of these you give your sense to someone, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the illness is spiteful.
You must not easily consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not rashly believe but wisely of those from whom you are certain, and from which you can take and lose.
and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients to lead salvation.
And this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Dear child, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, come.
Moreover, I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to that which is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have explained from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand those matters from which you will need assistance.
Know that this disease often comes to children during childbirth, and when the birth canal is too tight for the head of the child.
And sometimes it happens for reasons unknown.
I have never seen this disease in anyone except children, and all those I have seen, death was swift. And for that reason, it seems to me that I should devote myself less to these kinds of treatments.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and it grew larger every day until it could no longer support it.
And the moisture was so great that it caused his death, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone near the cartilage.
And the operations are such that if there is moisture between the cartilage and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you make an incision across the top of a wide opening.
And let it be as long as we can, until the moisture recedes.
Here is the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
If the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the openings of the mouths on each side, and it has no response when you press it from within with your hand, then: You must make three incisions in the middle of the bone in this manner:
And after the incision remove all the moisture. After straining the slits of linen cloths and powders, put vinegar and oil in it, and leave it so until the fifth day.
Then loosen (it), and heal the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head swell to a certain extent, and give the patient dry meat without moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another way of incising is to look at where the abscess swells the most, and where the water collects.
because sometimes it is in front; sometimes it is behind. sometimes on the right side;\] And sometimes on the left side.
Therefore, open the abscess or wound, drain the pus, and do what you can with it.
And be careful not to cover the artery. If blood comes out, let it flow so that the patient dies from bleeding and evacuation of fluid.
When it happens to someone with a disease called "catarrah" in the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and medicine does not help, then the last cure is the cautery on the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them covered, have the patient lay down on his back; After that, rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then grab the patient's neck with the cloth. Then look for the artery where it is visible, and the left and right ones are found behind the ears, and both will return.
Then mark the joints with a sharp spatula of two parts, then strike one and the other until it reaches the bone, and this should be done through the wide part of the joint.
And if you see it (the artery), push the sharp spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting as you would through two.
And when the vein is cut, it jumps up without ceasing continuously.
And if the artery does not open upon feeling, you must measure the space of three fingers, then mark and strike until it reaches the bone.
And it is necessary to force the blood out with a cupping glass of six centimeters, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery.
Then look at the wound. If the wound remains on the bone tip, if an abscess does not form, then hold the wound closed and bind it with a dressing until it heals.
of emigration When an old emigration comes and acute catarrh arrives, due to the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples, and an old foolish person becomes senile with similar things; it is treated by methods of medicine, but it does not help at all. If the arteries in the temples are opened and cauterized, as we have mentioned, it will help.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient pulls back the hairs on his temples, and listens for the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by beating, and it is slightly retracted outside except in some men who are too cold.
and if it is retracted, the patient pulls his neck with some cloths, then rubs the area with harsh fabric, and strokes the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly. then take the spatula as shown in this form: then gently peel the skin so that you see the artery, then draw it towards the prongs and separate well the threads that are underneath each part.
And if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the unguis (or nail), then strike that part according to the quantity of the two heads (shoulders). If it is not cut (or punctured), it will not heal at all.
Draw blood from the VI c (vein) up to the III (cubital vein or median cubital vein).
And if the artery is large, you should tie it with a strong double silk thread at two lengths, so that pus does not come out before the stitching of the wound, and there is a flow of blood.
Then strike the excess between the two ligatures in that hour itself, and then, if you see, cauterize with the cautery knife up to the bone until the shoulder is severed.
This is the mature work, if the patient does not have a fever and has a hot constitution. The cauteries are helpful to treat moisture (diseases): for this is of greater aid against diseases (moistures).
For the extraction of arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place it on well-made tents.
and when they are separated (the arteries), you should cure them with dry medicines that cause healing, and tents until it heals.
If you do not perform the operation on the artery as instructed, hasten to cover it with cautery or apply vitriol and hold your hand over it so that it stops bleeding. If you do not have that (the cautery or vitriol), place your hand on the area until it freezes, and rub the area with cold water continuously, and hold as necessary.
And between the two blades it should have a thick gap, and when you have positioned them properly in the two places, and the iron is heated hot enough to reach the bone, then strike the vein in the two places. And they should be separated between the two heads because it is not welded all over by this cautery.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And the one who is moving and lighter during the extraction of the artery should be cauterized with this cautery cutting through it in two parts, but they should be well thick for holding the heat longer. When the thermometer is too thin, it retains less heat.
tears When the tears from the eyes are running down the veins that are on top of the head of fire, and medicine cure does not help for it, and you see the patient writhing in pain, and feel his forehead to be cold like shivering. And if the eyes are soft and moist so that the eyelashes fall out, and the eyelids are scalded and burned by tears, this remedy is needed. And it was called by the ancients "contused cure", and you must do this to the patient who has this disease: shave the hair from the forehead, then make three equal incisions in the forehead according to its length.
And it was called by the ancients "contused cure", and you must do this to the patient who has this disease: shave the hair from the forehead, then make three equal incisions in the forehead according to its length. And one of the incisions should be as deep as necessary along the forehead from top to bottom, and the other two shall be along the eyebrows, but take care not to cut the arteries that are on the sides above the eyelids.
And remove your hand from the junction of the two jaws, and let each wound be the length of three fingers joined together.
And prepare a piece of sponge and a lot of cloth for wiping the blood, then insert the sharp spatula of about two fingers as shown here:
From the incision which is from the temple until the second incision; And scrape the whole core which is between the two incisions all along the bone, then do the other side from the mid-incision to the other second one, and then pull out this splinter. Insert the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first incision; it is well sharpened on one side, and on the other side it is soft, not sharp, and it has this shape:
And cut the bone towards the flesh at the chosen spot, and the bone becomes soft towards the bone, and push it until it comes to the mid-split.
And cut all the veins that descend from the head towards the eyes as long as the incision is continuous until it opens the core, and then do the other side in the middle fissure up to the other side.
And then drain the blood evenly, and press the place for the blood taken;
and put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and place damp linen cloths soaked in vinegar and oil and ashes on top, and ensure that no pus comes.
And on the third day separate the ligament, and apply a large poultice of cold water, then the healing ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it heals.
When an acute catarrh comes, you usually see the eyes become thin and small, and weakened vision, and burnt paper. And the hair falls out, and they make holes in the head with pain, and the patients cough. Therefore, you understand from these signs that those matters and this catarrh come only through many veins, and the medicine to cure it is this.
And you command the patient to bend his head back, then make a deep cut along the forehead and another wide one at the temples. And start from the hollow of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone; And move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move while eating;
When the bone is exposed, squeeze all the blood onto a sponge, then force it apart between the two lips of the fracture and put old cotton in there, and bind with linen. then cover with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscesses.
When it is removed (the bone), you must rub the bone until char becomes visible, then treat with things that are drying, which promote the formation of scab.
In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, and make an ointment. And administer linen cloth for dressing all wounds.
of the earstopping
Everything that falls into the ears is one of the Four Things: or grains, or beast, or stone from a mine, or similar things like iron. or seeds such as lentils, beans, peas. or flowing things like water and syrups and similar things.
When it falls into the ear, stone or otherwise, if it does not fit in the ear or does not grow within the ear, place the ear on the sun.
If you see a stone, apply a little purple oil or camphor oil, then administer extraction. and make him vomit with mustard, and stop the nostrils when vomiting occurs, and place around the ear cloth or wool. stretch the ear upward.
Much often comes fever by this cure;
and if it does not come fever, let it be administered the extraction of leeches, as follows:
If it jumps to leeches, that is good;
if not, let it be administered the extraction of the onion juice in small doses;
and if not, make a candle of beeswax and press the head of the candle or ear tube firmly, and stop up that which is around the candle with soft wax so that the vein cannot enter it with the candle. then draw it out carefully, for much often comes fever as we have said;
and if it does not come fever in this way, take glue from the source and take birds, put them in any device that is sharp for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around it. Then press the glute (buttock) on the bone or something, and draw it out (pull hard).
If it does not pop out from all the things we mentioned, then quickly cut (make a small incision) in the ear so that pus comes out and there is a spasm.
And the method of the incision is that you first make the patient drain the skull, remove blood according to the strength of its power, then sit the patient between your hands and turn the ear upside down, and make a small incision in the root of the ear where the fat or flesh hangs. And the incision should be like a crescent moon, reaching the bone, then remove (extract) the bone as strong as you can and suck out the pus quickly with your mouth.
And the treatment until it heals.
If it is swollen with grains (possibly boils), administer extraction;
and if it cannot issue, administer the thin, subtle sponge according to this form: and make an incision of that grain.
But do not do that if you think the grains are moist from ear moisture, as long as you have made several pieces;
Then extract with subtle tweezers and the sucker, as we have said, to ensure proper extraction.
Therefore in case of water that falls into the ear, the patient should use earwax drops first and stuff the ear with a large cotton ball. And let it lie on the same ear where the water is. If it jumps out due to this, that's good.
If that does not work, take many small and slender stones according to the length of your finger, heat them slightly in the fire; and make the patient place one or a pierced ear on it, and press from below with his feet, and strike another stone on the stone in the ear. And it does not stop making them pierce one stone after another until the fire goes out completely, and thus it leaps out completely.
And if you see it, grab the cord and push one of the shoulders into the ear, and take hold of the other head with fire until the more distant joint is burned.
Then make the same procedure for the other joints until the fire goes out completely, as we have said in the previous section.
In the extraction of an animal with a small body, such as a flea and similar creatures, treat it as we have said in the classification.
but if it has a large body that can be felt, bring the forceps extraction; And it is easier to remove what is in the ear than what is on the body of the animal.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you care for it as we have said in the section and in treating distillations, and the patient does not improve; if this happens, you must observe the ear under the sun. If worms appear, take them with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, take the cane that has the following shape:
And narrow below and wide above. And insert the more subtle tip into the ear according to the quantity of pain in the patient, then move it completely along the cane. Perform this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey and come out, stuff the cane with cotton as I said in the previous section.
And if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the ancient ones have proven in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations.
And if you distil oil and medicine into the ear in this manner, here is the form as you see: Let it be made of silver or tin narrowly placed under the small openings, and covered above for distillation.
And to press within the distillation apparatus of tin well made for this purpose, and if you see take a razor and wrap it around the tip with cotton. Then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish into the cane, and the cane should be in the ear.
Then push inside the strainer with all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or the ear's opening enlarges. and feel the patient's senses inside, and heat the distillation container near the fire so that it is heated in the ear. and make sure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
of the earstopping
No child is born without some birthmark in the ear.
And the same thing happens in men by ear wound or pus discharge from within the ear, and this discharge sometimes completely fills the ear, if it cannot be seen.
And sometimes the birthmark disappears, and it can be clearly seen.
Therefore, when it comes from the font (source), if one cannot see it, is a grave healing in many situations, and in such cases, you must place the patient's ear towards the sun. and look within: if you see the abscess appearing, work with this spatula of which form is as follows:
And be sharp and pointed both front and back, so that it does not pierce the ear.
if the abscess is of flesh or bone from the ear, hold it with subtle forceps and strike gently until all the flesh is removed.
And if the swellings are entirely in the ear, take a fine razor lightly and heat it slightly with fire, then place it in the ear canal.
If you feel the abscess from which the patient feels pain in the ear, pierce gently and ensure that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
Then put a plaster of suitable size in the ear according to the wound's width, and apply the Egyptian ointment to it. Every day until the wound is healed, take a plaster and apply it with rose water, and powdered crushed glass on top.
And if you see the ear swell, it is necessary that you remove the plaster and apply another damp cloth made of rose oil and wax until the swelling disappears. Then heal it until it is healed.
If there is a flow of pus, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments to remove the flow of pus which are either distillation methods.
This is the method that comes on paper when the hairs are moist and dry. It is necessary that you stretch them with tweezers and forceps, and cut off their roots with a spatula. Then put vitriol powder on its place.
If not scabbed over, then cauterize with the subtle lenticular cautery and after incision is beneficial;
And many times they recur, where nothing remains rooted from them. (in context of dislocated limbs or shoulders) and when they are burnt with fire, the roots are burned away and they do not return. (in context of cauterizing)
of the hailstone Many times they come in the form of gravel, appearing hard and solid, for which this disease is called "hail", and it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the paper above and below. (this appears to refer to a skin condition or infection) The operations are as follows: (beginning a list of medical procedures, possibly related to the previous sentences about dislocations, cauterizing, and hail-like lesions)
The operations are as follows: (beginning a list of medical procedures, possibly related to the previous sentences about dislocations, cauterizing, and hail-like lesions) Take care to let the "hail" disappear on both sides, and this is an easy thing to know. (still in the context of skin lesions/infections)
Cut (it) open then widely, next scrape gently from each part, then take with the forceps and crush it.
if you cannot cover it without piercing a little the paper, do not worry the patient.
and if the wound is large, join it with a stitch, and treat it until it heals.
and if it is small, do not apply any pressure, because the ointments restore it soon and improve the flesh.
And if the pus is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and extract the pus with forceps, and press it from both sides.
and if the paper is moved by incision, do not worry.
And when hail is struck, apply oil of salty water to it and heal the wound of those who are injured by it until the patient recovers.
of the fat of the hairs Exinach is a grease that is rendered in paper towels above and it happens more with children than with adults, and it causes great pain to their eyes, and they come down with catarrh in the mornings and cannot bear the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes.
And because of this they lie on their faces right away and sleep on them, and their papers are beneath their eyelids moistened with exinach which spreads in the oil. And when you press the joint with your hands and feel the dislocation emerging between them.
And the manner of work is that the patient holds their head on your hand;
Then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the size required by each part (Exirnach), then place it over him; and press with your arms from both sides so that the Exirnach (a surgical instrument) is assembled within the circle;
then make an incision in the middle of the Exirnach with the moistor (spatula-like tool) cutting a slit wide enough, but not larger than the wound made for vein opening;
and cut the skin all the way through to expose the Exirnach; And in many positions, an extrusion comes out from the wound, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Place then a piece of rough cloth between your hands at the wound and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread.
And ensure that you do not insert anything into the wound, nor come all the way to the fatty tissue, nor prick it.
If the extrusion does not open at the beginning of the wound, lift up the wound slightly to make it appear.
Then pull out as we have said, then wet cloths in oil and water and place on it, and press down with bandages.
And for such people who grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Then heal him until he is healthy.
If an abscess forms at the joint, then heal it with plasters softening it until he is healthy.
hair of the papyrus (meaning: plants or fibers resembling hair) When paper-like growths appear on the eyelashes and are nourished, they harm the eyes and bring about types of diseases such as constant tearing and swelling of the eyelids, up until this is the cause of the destruction of the eyes.
and the cure follows according to four methods: or by a cautery combined with fire, or by medicine hot according to what is before in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by cutting and stitching or by blisters, as I shall say.
You must place the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper from the oil to your left hand.
if it is turned over, that's good. If not, push an awl through the hole above [it]. and shave the edge of the paper where the hairs grow from the hairs, pull the thread to the top of the paper, and smooth it with a razor.
then make a groove in the part underneath the paper, under the hairs, along the entire space, from the large incision to the small one.
then pull the thread and place a small tent of cloth and linen underneath the paper, then draw a design on the paper of a hook, like the briar rose, but the figure must be according to the amount you want to raise the paper that is specified for all [patients].
And if it is necessary to apply a large quantity of paper as softened by them, [it should be done] thus:
then spread the plaster all over the area spanning two lines that you have marked, and start from the large tear down to the small one; and one of the cracks should be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then push the onion into one of the two corners at an angle, then peel it all;
then bring the two lips together with a stitch of a single awl thread made of fine wool, squeeze out the blood, and make the excess threads adhere to the blisters using any suitable substance if you wish to do so.
And if this is not the case, without care, then leave the stitching and the threads for three days or four.
Then heal the wound without stitching with drying and binding substances, as paper revives at the edge of the wound and its assembly, but the stitches are rotten (as the ancients say), and it is laborious without fear. and in another way:
and in another way: And it is that you cut a piece of paper into a shape like the fennel seed, as we have said, in three times divided according to the form below:
then cut that which stands above the small sections equally according to the following form:
And if you do not have the ability to hold pliers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with thread, and place it within the shape. and bring out the other thread from the large hole, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your fingers.
then place your hand evenly and lift the entire skin over which you have signed, as we have said, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and heal it until it is healthy.
And if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with cerate and similar soothing ointments.
Sometimes the hair of the papier is converted:
it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision;
however, the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of dogs follows this form: and it is that you convert the paper and place it within as I have said, then make two dogs by craft, and two thin strings as long as the paper and the width of the staple is. and cut the heads of the two parts where you hold the threads;
then assemble one and the other subtly above where the paper is covered with oil, and press the two dogs made from the two parts together. And leave it so for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and rot and fall off when it rots through.
If it remains delayed and becomes necrotic, then heal it as long as it is healthy;
And when the wound heals and the paper rises, and the hairs will not grow back.
And this is the shape of the two canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
You take a thin needle and insert the silk thread and make it thin. then bring together the heads and attach one to another thinly, and let the length of the threads be a palm-length.
place the other silk thread in the canine shape briefly, and attach its head.
then put the patient's head on your lap.
let the patient be in the sun so that the work is clear, for this work is subtle and small. Then push the needle through the entire canine shape to its root alongside the natural hair, and make it pierce the paper quickly until you draw it over the natural hair.
Then pull the hair up to the skin, and push the hair into the skin if there is one, two, three or more of them.
Then pull your hand along with the hairs as far as they reach the skin to the paper, taking out the natural hair.
And if the skin is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will pull the skin down to its full extent according to what you have prepared, until the skin comes out through the hole above and you see it through the eye's sight.
Then you will pull the skin and the thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair adheres in its place and a blister forms above.
If the hairs are small, let the long hair of the head grow along with it, and raise them together until they are lengthened, then shave them.
of the purulence of oil When this illness called "alecrati" or the boil comes in the eye, it occurs in two ways:
One natural, the other unnatural.
And it happens due to a sudden wound, or incision, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the manner of work is that you split that joint, separate the lips from it, and insert linen bands inside, and keep it until it heals.
And you must not use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrain. For if you do this, the illness becomes worse than the first one;
but the work of softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rose water or ale and flaxseed should be cooked, and dilute a bit of Dachshund oil in any oil, and wrap it in a linen band, and treat this.
And the treasures of your care are such that you should take care not to suture it in its former shape;
and this work that we have said is not without the correction of this disease, so that it does not recur in its former shape.
This disease which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accidents come from wounds, cuts, cauterization and similar things;
and the path of the work is that you take a needle with double thread, and pierce it through the skin from left to right so that the threads come out in two holes in the skin.
Then, raise the skin over the whole needle, and apply the spatula wide. And if the shape of the bone returns as it should, it is good;
If not, take the rasp and place it in the gap, and turn the bone, and make two gaps where the bone touches inside the bone.
and let the ends of the two gaps at the angles of the incision you made be aligned, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is as a letter with the name "Greek cross".
then remove that cartilage according to its size so that it is even with the bone on both sides of it, and join the two separated parts using a piece of linen thread.
then apply the medicine for softening as we have said, and let it heal until it is healed.
And if the patient's illness comes from a cut or stitch or burn, you must make a clean incision beneath the hair on the affected area, as described earlier. then separate the two sides of the wound with forceps, as I said.
then separate the two sides of the wound with forceps, as I said. and the work should be done according to the shape of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare tools with all possible skill to restore the figure to its natural form.
and the patient himself, according to what work and instruments are required in various situations.
When the suture of the skin is like the paper above is sewn with white oil and cannot move or perform natural functions, then it is necessary to insert a sharp instrument under the skin and lift it up.
And hold it with forceps, until you grasp the cartilage that is near the subtletiespate, which should not be too sharp nor too pointed, so that the patient cannot suffer from the too sharp spatula pricking the eye.
And make your incision, from which you scrape the gathered tissue, gently, so that the paper returns according to its natural shape.
And all the gathered tissue is healed, and sometimes in the sharp oil it becomes infected, and lifts of sharp vinegar and vinegar water.
Then put a tent of linen between the paper and the oil, and above the oil place wool soaked in plenty of egg. And after three days use vinegar water and hot things until it is healed.
Know that the claw is according to two ways: the claw is either nerve-like and similar to hard horn, or another that is not nerve-like but resembles white frozen moisture, when it is touched by iron and cooked with pliers, it cannot be moved.
and both begin towards the great corner, and grow little by little until it covers the whole eye and all the light and the movement of the oil.
And the method of incision is that the patient places his head on a healthy surface, then he opens his eyes; and you lift the paper with your hand, then press the claw with small pliers and hold it above; Then take a needle, put horsehair or cowhair or bull's hair, and a strong thread; and bend the tip of the needle slightly and thrust it into the nail, and pierce through with the whole needle, tie the nail with a thread and extend it above, and shave the hair from the side of the nail where there is the pulp and the silk to the root, then chop the remaining in the root of the armpit with subtle spatula and small force, leaving the natural flesh or armpit so that by incision the body does not bring forth tears as usual.
and sometimes the nail remains at the fingertip only, according to what we said; Then scrape off all the fatty tissue of this kind, which is the shape:
And ensure that the fatty tissue does not touch the muscular layer and break it, and that the muscle fiber is not pierced.
And after the incision pour oil a little piece of egg yolk beaten, and with collirium made from litharge, leave it until the next day. Then heal the wound as necessary until it heals completely.
If the nail is not nerve-rich and you cannot insert a needle and the unguent can't enter, many times this appearance of the nail is cured with medicines.
And as I mentioned in the previous section, when they grow out, if you see them covered, open the oil for the patient, take a little sharp fatty tissue as per this shape: And scrape the nail slightly above, and if you see that it does not diminish at all and the reason for this becomes apparent, distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litargyre and red collyrium powder, and instill the oil until the next day;
If nothing opposes you in the oil, like an abscess heals, then milk it, and first heal the abscess hot until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Then repeat the other work according to this same method, until it is completely healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the eye is harmed by the oil through great damage, suspend it on an onion, and cut a small portion, not completely, so that tears do not come.
Then distill into the red collyrium oil made of litargyre.
The hairs of some men sometimes grow red and cover the eyelid, rising above the paperwork and turning towards the outside, resembling a balanced rose.
and the work is that the patient places their head on a pillow, then opens the eyes, and all that red hair should be cut with appropriate scissors, and it must be held firmly.
then cut the first red hair, and continue cutting to the end with scissors until the very end, and be careful not to prick the oil during the work.
and the incision with the spatula, as we have said in the treatment of the nail and small forces like those used to remove a splinter, according to the form after this chapter.
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, use oil of rosin broken or distilled red collyrium, which resemble corrosive medicines, spread it over cotton with egg white, so that it is securely hot on the abscess.
If anything remains, and the wound becomes cold, and you doubt whether it is hot on the abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that soothe it.
Then return to your work when it is healed, and in this way do all charms that are soaked in oil with this resemblance.
But you must lighten the treatment of each oil by the natural way. And of the accidental way, in work with iron;
and not to press your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from the work.
Red veins that are covered with oil become visible and their work (operation) can be seen and the oil weakens completely every day.
Therefore, it is necessary at first that you observe whether oil, in which the sebaceous gland is, is out or foreign, and has no other disease but the sebaceous gland. Then press your hand on it in this manner:
instruct the patient to place their head in your hand, then hold these veins all the way along according to his wisdom, and let the incisions be subtle doubles according to this form:
And let there be two degrees of pressure in one stroke according to this form:
Then press these veins gently but firmly, and squeeze the blood hour after hour until you see the veins move away from the oil.
And be careful not to bleach the oil at the tips of the splinters, and perform this task at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that you do not catch these wounds.
When you have done this, if you distill green and red oil, it will heal the sores that are hardened by the scab.
And if you cannot collect everything in that hour, make a plaster on the oil of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and assured of abscessing hot, then continue according to this method as before until it is healed.
And this is the form of forces:
The tool called "arissati" is:
When you cure it with cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and if it is not healed, there is an instrument in it that you split above the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, while the bone remains exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, if it is completely in the instrument of which this form is:
and is called "sharp head", and should be made of iron, with the head rounded like a spearhead as shown in this form:
And place it on the bone of the dislocation, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand slightly until you feel that the dislocation is reset.
And do this once, then restore the joint with medicine-absorbing substances.
if the joints are fused and char is present and the core of the bone is fused and remains so for 40 days without renewal and it is not abscessed or infected, know that it is healed.
if this is not the case, there is no other device for bringing the fistula to the surface according to this shape: and it is that you open the bone a second time with iron, and with hot medicines, and when it is opened, take the forceps according to this shape, and let the head of the forceps have three angles, and let the shaft be narrowed towards the end as you see here:
Then place it on the dislocated bone next to the socket, and move your hand away from the oil hole. Then turn the entire key all the way until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it if he holds his hand on his neck.
And then restore the dislocation with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the flesh heals and hardens the dislocation, the matter goes to the neck. it is easier for the patient.
When the eyes are wide open in all directions and it does not move to the neck or decrease, you must hold the patient.
Then heal it, then put on mustard or hot poultices without iron to help, then place on the oil made from acacia and aloe and incense and saracocolla, and then hold it in place, and apply ointment on bands and cloths.
The manner of plasters is that you take soft plasters, fold each one into four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes require.
Then strain it with a hard bandage form and repeat the blisters for sucking without wounding.
Then remove the blisters and let the oil remain strained day and night, and if it becomes unstrained, you must strain it strongly.
Then remove the bandage after the day and the night, and if you see the oil repair, that's good.
but if not; If it is not so, repeat the plasters and the bandage and blisters and the wounds until it heals.
The open wound of the eye does not heal on its own. When dislocations occur in the ruptured eye, it opens, and paper-like substances come out like drops of resin, and it is terrible to see.
Then, if you see it, cover [the eye] with the work being such that you insert an awl into the root of the affected part up to where it is above, then insert another awl or double thread from the lid side. and make it pierce through, and leave the first awl in place according to its position.
then take the double thread and tie a part of the eyeball around it, and tighten it, then remove the awl and put moistened egg yolk oil on it.
leave it until the threads stick to the eyeball, then heal the egg yolk oil with soothing things until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the wound is bound on each side with a circle of cloth until it heals.
If the eyes appear swollen, pierce them with a thin splint coming from oil, and draw out the moisture and pus, then put medicine in immediately.
Then pull it out until it is healed.
This disease called "alcunnati" is not foreign to one who has been assembled in oil, resembling an abscess, but it is not an abscess.
The manner of the appearance of this disease is that you make the patient sit on a prepared chair and upright, then take hold of its head between both hands, and move it until you see the abscess come to your eyes. Then let it (the affected part) be driven in, and do not withdraw (it), and clear the opening, and show the patient the things as he is accustomed.
And if it does not withdraw, know that it is infected, and if the dressing of the bowl is not prepared as we have said.
Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the thin spatula and make a hole in the cornified tissue through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornified tissue and the bone, as far as the bowl goes.
And when it (the pus) comes out, distill it in hot sharp oil mixed with honey or hot oil of fenugreek and honey, then let it be treated with another remedy until it is healed.
The sharp points of oil We have similarities with the eyes of hawks in cutting, and those things that must be pierced. according to the healthiness.
You must make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from sunlight and hold the oil saint and tighten very strongly.
then put the paper of the oil on your left hand if the eyes are left, or to your right hand if the eyes are right.
then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eyes are right.
then place the tip of the instrument under the crown through the thickness of a reed in that hollow part of the oil at the lower eyelid, then push the instrument called "almagda" firmly and hold your hand as long as it pierces the lower eyelid, and feel that almagda comes to an empty place.
The measure of the way (should be) equal to the depth of the space which is from the prunele up to the end of the nail. and it's the crown of the oil.
If you see the bone in this paper through the clarity of the horned cloth, then put the instrument up to it or where the sore is, and then press down along another path afterwards.
If the instrument is to be applied now, the patient sees it before him and the tool in its oil.
After a little rest, if the sore rises along the second path, put the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and it no longer rises, it should be straightened gently by turning your hand slowly.
Then put some small gemmed silk thread on the sore again, and remove this oil from within. Then, moist a cloth or woolen cloth with rose oil and egg, and bind it with clean oil.
We, and those of our time, place on top, finely ground with much egg.
And if almagda cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, since there are some men who have excessively hard hairs, then you must take the instrument called "alberit," which is shaped like this:
And then pierce the joint only, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then put in alum, as we have said.
And for the completion of the work, prepare the patient, the sleeper, arriving, with him lying on his back in a darkened place.
and let him be deprived of all movements, take light foods, and not move his head to the right or left, and bind him accordingly for three days.
then unbind him in the same darkened house, test his sight, and make him see certain things, and then bind him again for seven days.
and it is not necessary that you do this during the hour of treatment or after incision now, but it is necessary that you reduce this, because the pain increases quickly.
If an abscess swells up, you should lance the oil before the seventh day, and follow the guidance of those who soothe abscesses.
And when it is soothed, you should close the wound with ointment to cover it for any day, and remain in that dark room always.
Then leave the house little by little, and return to your usual state.
And know that no disciple should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from the East, who told us that in his land they make almond juice like vinegar, causing it to be sour, but I have never seen anyone do this in our land, nor have I read of it in any ancient books. And by chance, it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of almagda, because he who does not know them sees them.
and they are from a specific kind of arrow: And these are the characteristics of the heads of this same subtlety, and the rear parts in four corners sharp.
Sometimes new or nascent charms resemble various different things, of which there are some that seem like scorpions with many feet.
and if there are such [charms] or if the charm is swollen of this color, and if the charm is soft of bone color. Therefore, in those cases of soft charms, and not swollen, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun.
Therefore, in those cases of soft charms, and not swollen, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun. and open his nostrils, and pour the onion juice onto those charms, and draw them out. Then take that which you can hold with a fine sharp spatula on one side, as long as you know that the charm is entirely extracted.
And if there remains something which cannot be captured, open it all with fine, light instruments so that nothing remains. And if the abscess swells or boils up, help as necessary.
If it is malignant boils, hurry and cauterize them until the pus dries up and all the charred matter is removed, then apply oil or cold water and vinegar or wine. If it does not heal with the application of moisture, and malignity comes up to the palace (meaning the head), know that it is healthy.
And if moisture does not pierce as necessary, know that there is pus formed in the bone above, to which the probe will not come for cutting.
Then you must put a cotton ball made from flax fibers into it, moistened with our hands, and leave a space between each cotton ball of the required size or less. And place the patient's head through the hole in the cloth in his neck as far as possible, and draw it out while smelling it until it comes out of the neck through the cloth.
And children often do this in school, and it is easy for one who wishes to perform it.
Then hold the head coming through the neck with one hand and the other head coming from the mouth with the other hand, and guide each other's head in turn while we who are filament-makers do it.
Do this until you know that the knot has spoiled that flesh, then draw out the filament, cleanse the blood, and moisten the filament in Egyptian ointment and put it back into the neck as before.
Allow it to remain for three days or more, until the salve has corroded everything that remains of flesh.
and then place or insert a plaster made of linen for some days until it is healed, and if there is a need for drying medicines, use them.
and this is the shape of the instrument to purge the head, by which they distill the oils and medicines and insert them.
And it should be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a plaster, and lead it in the same way.
If you see, then make a closed plaster, and let the instrument be flat to purge the head.
and have a handle on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the pus in the nose
Often, in the head of the nose, a disease named "telul" arises, which grows and becomes large, until it can be seen with the eye.
and for that reason, you should cut it at the beginning, completely remove it, then put the fire cautery or burning medicine on its place.
If it is not cut immediately when it becomes large, beware if it is hard, of a dark color, and has poor sensation.
do not touch it with iron because it is an abscess that swells, for when you cut it once, much harm comes to the patient.
If the abscess is soft to touch, not of a dark color and you can cover it completely, empty the patient and cut with caution, then treat the place with things that are dry and constricting.
Know that when solution comes in one of these articular cavities [joints], it benefits little, unless in some men.
Therefore, whoever experiences this [issue], look if the wound is fresh with all its blood. Then align the two lips to a stitch, then heal it until it is healed;
And if the lips are disconnected from one side and the other, you must scrape all the parts of them until they heal, then bring together the two lips to a stitch, bind it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood and incense powder on it. And place a plug of plaster of strength or another plaster adhering to it, and leave it until it heals by itself, then heal it with ointment until it is healed.
The method of stitching is that you gather together the solution (The way to sew it is by bringing together the solution). with needles, as we said in abdominal stitching; or with thread, as I have told you (The method of stitching is also by thread, as I have informed you).
about abscesses from lips
Inside the mouth, there appears an abscess hard like grains of wheat, both smaller and larger (Inside the mouth, an abscess appears that is hard and looks like grains of wheat, some are smaller and others are larger).
Then you must turn the lips, cut on top of each tooth, and take it with the forceps and crush it in each part (Then, you should turn the lips, make an incision above each tooth, take it with the forceps and crush it in each area).
then apply the solution after the incision of crushed vitriol, until the wound is cauterized (Then, use the solution after making an incision with crushed vitriol until the wound is cauterized).
Then apply a salve to the dislocation, and treat the shoulder with dry things until it heals.
Often a cyst grows on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus".
You must hold it with tweezers, cut off its root and leave the cyst or blood to flow.
Then put on the wound vitriol powder, or other powders that contract and dry.
If the cyst returns after incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it. It does not return after cauterization.
Sometimes there are sores assembled at the root of teeth inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and harsh. And sometimes teeth are black and yellow and decaying, until the corruption reaches the gums, and they stink.
You must make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulders be on you, and remove the teeth or the scales that appear, until nothing remains. And do the same with blackness, greenness, yellowing, and other spots, until they are cleaned.
If you remove what is there at the first cause, it is good; If not, start again on the second or third day and continue until everything is removed.
Know that teeth require various forms of instruments for cleaning, according to what the work demonstrates, because the one who cleans the teeth has different shapes than the one who cleans between the teeth. And these forms and others be prepared with you.
It is necessary that when you cure the tooth of its pain, you delay the pulling as much as possible, for it should not be done at all. because it is a very high substance up to that point, so there can be no excuse for pulling.
Therefore, when the patient is forced to draw, you must be sure of the correct tooth. Often the patient experiences pain and believes it is a holy tooth, and pulls out the healthy tooth. Nevertheless, the pain does not go away because of this, until the bad one is removed, for we have already seen this in holy men.
And when you are certain that the tooth is loosening, it is necessary to score around the tooth completely. Spatula strongly to protect the gums from all sides;
Then turn your hands or subtle tweezers to the first joint and then gradually, until they are well dislocated, then firmly hold the tweezers. Hold the patient's arm in your lap, and keep it so that it does not move.
After the tooth is extracted correctly to break it, and if it does not come out freely, take any of these instruments and gently push it from each side, and move it as you have done before.
If the bone is pierced and eaten away, then you must fill it with rags where the wounds are. And if you hold it gently with tweezers so that it does not break while pulling.
You must cut around the gum to remove the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, or the patient will suffer greater pain from the root.
Be careful not to act like the foolish lord who in haste and recklessness often breaks the cartwheel, and does not bring about what we have described.
But sometimes they come on account of the excretion of this great disease through the roots that remain, or by breaking the cartilage, as we have often seen.
And when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with vinegar or alum and oil.
If bleeding occurs in the process, as often happens, use vitriol powder.
And if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the tools used to mute the tooth first should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth.
and these are their forms: And should be large enough so that they do not bend when separating, and should be made of good iron, and serrated for holding onto the teeth.
From the root of the teeth When the root remains to be pulled out, it is necessary that you place cotton soaked in butter for one or two days on the place until the place is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri", which look like a beak of an instrument.
And within it should be made like a chisel, and this is its shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, you must uncover the entire cheek around the root and use the instrument called "althali," which is known as plier, of which this is the form:
And it should be long and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps through it, that is good;
If not, help yourself with all tools, so that the shapes come afterward:
And help with this tool having two prongs, of which this shape comes from it: And other iron objects that are in front of the teeth roots, and with this tool resembling large pliers, from which this shape comes:
Let this tool be long so it cannot break, and know that many dense tools are needed: And also other tools, which are not counted;
And the wise masters skilled in themselves find their tool according to what their work and illness require, for there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach an instrument because of the diversity of ailments, and if it breaks on the cart or other bones, where it can be, seek the tools that are necessary, which I have told you, and help with gestures, so this is the shape:
And they must be large and sturdy to hold the bone, so that it does not slip away, but can be held and removed.
And then restore the joint with appropriate medicines, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, let the patient rest with this instrument.
When the teeth do not appear in accordance with natural form and the shape is deformed, especially in young women; if this happens, you should know that the tooth has not erupted after the dent, and it is not in its proper place, and it cannot be removed or filed.
Then the ray. And if it is outside with the tooth, take this instrument that has this shape and resembles a small beak, and should have sharp iron at its end.
And the tooth, little by little in many days, due to hardness of the dentin, and because you cannot move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, file it with a small steel file as shown below in form.
And it is as if the limb is like the mold for making needles.
And in this mold the tooth is slowly and lightly carved day by day until it falls out.
Then the plane is finished at one end with any smoother, and if the tooth is too sharp and bites the tongue, then the roughness must be filed until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the tooth falls out in front, either by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot chew food without it falling out, and you treat them with constricting medicines, that does not help.
Therefore they must be held with a gold wire, for silver threads become green and rot, but gold never changes.
And the rod should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth.
And if you want to align the teeth, take the rod and place it between two teeth without damage, then insert the head between the adjacent teeth (if there is one or more of them), until you see it clearly up to the healthy tooth on the other side. then continue covering up to the part where you started, and hold your hand gently and skillfully so that it does not move.
And bind the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then hold the head with the rod to tongs and assemble them, and place them between the healthy tooth, so that it does not pierce the tongue.
And then leave it as tight as it can remain, and if it dislocates or loosens, pull on another thread to hold it in place.
If it remains and serves thus throughout its duration, this is the shape of teeth and the form of the alignment of two healthy teeth, or two molars, as you can see.
And when a tooth falls out, one puts it back in its place, freshly, as we have said.
And do not interfere with it unless one is wise and experienced; and sometimes a tooth-shaped piece of cow bone is made, and it is placed in the place where it is missing, and held as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
At times there is a link coming from below the tongue, which occurs naturally; or by injury caused by a healed wound;
and the procedure is such that you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head steady, and pull out the tongue.
then grasp the nerve-like link with forceps, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if there is hardness or knotting, and it is due to a sudden injury, press the incision and crush the link with forceps.
and be careful that the cut is not too deep, for there is an artery below.
and when you have completed, raise the place of fresh water or warm water, then put a linen tent under the tongue.
And the itch troubles the patient each night, preventing the limb from healing.
If bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol to the wound. And if the wound does not heal, cauterize it with the cautery of lentiginosum, which is good for this purpose. Then treat it with another remedy until it heals,
And if you see a spot that is hard, black or dark, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
If it is swelling and there is moisture, pour in onion juice using a thin spatula, then release it from both sides. And if the bone protrudes at your work, place vitriol powder on it until it is cauterized, then return to your work when you have drawn out all fire.
Then lift the limb gently and carefully, and heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
of throat abscesses Sometimes boils called "godath" come up inside the throat. They are properly called "two almonds," and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
If it is a hard abscess of small size and darkish color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood. But leave it until it is dead, and then you will separate it, or it would break by itself.
If it is of white color and the root is thin, prepare the instrument for covering; but first check if the abscess is calm and soothed.
Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his shoulders be on your side, and open his mouth and take hold of him by the sergeant between his hands, and press the tongue down onto the entire instrument, so that it takes this shape.
And be made of silver or thin iron like a knife.
Can you press the tongue onto the entire instrument, and if you see the abscess, take the probe and push it into the abscess and pull it upward more than you can.
And draw no object from the cloth with it, then grasp it with the instrument, in this manner it is shaped, like a pair of pincers; And if the neck is curved and bent to one side, and they are very sharp, made of iron or bone;
And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the base with pliers, here is its shape: It is called a traction on one side and a compression on the other;
And when you have grasped one of the nuts, grasp the other in the same manner, and after the incision, pour warm, hot, sharp, and sticky medicine on the patient, and if bleeding occurs, continue to pour warm medicine until the wound is sealed or cooked grape seeds are used, or pine needles, and similar things, until the wound is stopped. Then, the care until it heals.
And sometimes in the throat other abscesses than the two molars are born, so cut them as you would the two molars equally.
And I treat a woman of an abscess that was born within the throat, namely the abscess of small size;
and had tightly closed the entire throat so that the woman could not exhale due to the narrowed passageway, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for a day or two.
And the abscess was so swollen that it had been pressed in by two fingers through both nostrils.
Then I quickly made an incision in one of the armpits, and after that, I pulled it forcefully out, and removed a large piece of pus.
Then reset another part on the other side of the neck, and open the mouth and press the tongue;
After inserting the lance into these abscesses, and scraping a part of it, not more than a little blood was released. And thus the woman's windpipe was cut open from the throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease cutting into this abscess for a long time.
The abscess continued to grow again and filled the cavity that I had seen, becoming quite large.
Then I trapped it and cauterized it within the throat. In this way, it stopped growing.
And may these parts be divided, and let God restore them after I am gone.
of the eye
When the rectum protrudes outwards and is long, it is called "perpendicular".
And if it is deep and round, it is called "bladder".
If it is cured as we have said in the previous section, and the cure does not help, and you notice that the large abscess has subsided, and it becomes subtle, then you must cut it.
And the round one which is gathered together but not long; And it is red or of pale color or black, then you must avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger for the patient.
Then, when you see it, as I have said, according to its color and size, you must make the patient sit in front of the sun and press his tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned before. Then push the onyx into the eye and pull it out, and tie it with the two instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
And you must not cover anything that is beyond the natural limit.
because if you cover more, it will harm the voice and the speech.
And after the incision, use as we have said in the incision of the two arms, and treat it until it heals.
If the patient fears to be covered, then you must use an instrument for the cauterization of his fear.
And the manner of the cautery is hot and sharp. The patient should place his head on your holy relic, and then press the tongue against the instrument as we have said in the chapter of caution, and bind it with hot, sharp iron, so that it is not too thick or too clear. and use the handle of this instrument, which has the following shape:
And have a head of hair where medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine above the eye.
The patient should lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine, but not reach the throat or the wound.
Then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the eye for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it [the eye] shrink and the biting of the medicine is soothed.
and if you see [something], take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and press the instrument against all of the cotton on the eye socket, until the cotton adheres to the eyelid.
and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and wash after four or five days.
And if you need to start the cautery again from the medicine, then start it, and after the cautery let water around the eye, with a cotton ball in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
And let it be cooled with cold water, and let it be cured with gargles until it is healed.
This cure is more effective than incision, not just the fire cautery;
if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calmant (calamint?), ysope, origanum (oregano), rue, camomille (chamomile), avronne (wormwood?) and similar herbs, and put them all or some of them together in a pot, and add asafetida, and boil it;
and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and in the pot there should be the instrument of hair according to this manner: And it should be silver or gold, and one of the heads pushed into the patient's mouth until the vapors rise to the eye through the canal, until the eye is putrefied;
Afterward, it often continues until the eye dries up, and ensure that you do not perform this at the beginning of an abscess's opening, for many things happen. and not do this except in the decline of an abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put an eggshell crack into the head so that the patient's mouth is not too hot. because the eggshell does not let the vapor harm the mouth, and it is a good cure together with safety.
Many times it becomes lodged in the throat with bone or fish spine, or something similar.
Therefore, it is necessary that you pull out whatever you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instruments, so that you can see movements in the thing.
And whatever does not open and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach. By chance if the thing escapes through vomiting.
Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread. And tie a thread to the sponge, and then make him swallow it. And when it reaches its place, if it hardens, then you will draw it out.
If it does not come out as we have said, then take the plunger according to this shape:
And let the handle of the instrument be bent at the top so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and lift the head up. And watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, let it come slowly, and do not push the bone in.
It is better for the patient to insert the instrument, since they will move or the matter is urgent. If it goes down, or you pull it out with the whole instrument equally until it is out.
the saliva of the throat
Sometimes, sulphur is medicine, as I said in the division, through the use of medicines. And when that does not help, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, since you press his tongue with the instrument I told you about.
If you see the saliva, take it away with a very small spoon, or fine tweezers that are suitable for this purpose.
If it is not successful, take a heated iron and put it in the throat of the sick person, then push or pull the iron up and down several times. Make the patient drink water all day long.
then take a full eye dropper of cold water, open the mouth, and throw it in to swallow, and move it with your hand frequently. and as soon as sulphur feels the water, it falls.
And if it does not fall as we said, sulphurize the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I told you about in the eye fumigation.
Do this many times, because it will require patience.
And the method of fumigation is that you take the pot or it has charcoal in it, and cover it with a cover made from a perforated cloth in the middle, and put the head of the instrument in it.
Then pour the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the snake in his mouth, and closes the mouth so that the smoke does not escape but comes to the wound.
and now the wound should bleed, and if it does not bleed, then repeat the fumigation many times;
The patient suffers thirst, eats salty and raw food, and drinks no water.
And then it will be necessary for the wound to bleed through this method.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the vein, is, as it can be seen, similar to curved tweezers for entry into the throat. and it has the shape of a probe, and it is covered in lime, such that whatever it grasps, it cannot release.
It has a similar form to an abscess, according to the remembrances that follow in this book, and they are various in piercing and cutting.
and it is in two ways: one of which resembles the same, and of that which it holds moisture.
And the second manner is for those that are in the body.
For abscesses of the head are other than those in the base, and abscesses in the hollow part of the bone are other than those that come at joints, and each should be judged according to its work.
And to abscesses, one should not pierce until the bowel is measured according to its completion;
And if there are some that require piercing when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that have burst open from joints.
When abscesses come to joints and are left until it is purged around them, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may become corrupt, which causes contraction in that member.
If the abscess is burst open at the main member, and you delay the piercing until it has decayed, it will harm the main member.
if it has burst from the foundation, pierce it while it is still alive;
Do not pierce the abscess that is ripe without digestion completed, except for those which have burst from the foundation, it will not heal completely and a fistula will come. and cannot heal in great time.
And you must know the hour of piercing the abscess that is ripe according to its completion, and it is when the pain is eased, and the disappearance of fever, the decrease in pain and redness, and the swelling and settling of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
And you must make him sit with the perforation or closer to the abscess, and at the place where the wound has opened.
And the perforation should be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hand or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal or without opening. In those who have swelling in such a member.
And when an abscess is in a charred state, it is better to leave the perforation until it is confirmed by complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce before that, it will be filled with the body's fluids and full of filth. And by chance, harden the lips and plunge deep into it.
And if any abscess pierced in accordance with the body's width, according to what the limb needs.
And you must bring small abscesses, small wounds. and in large abscesses, large wounds, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess.
And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover and cure with lard, [that's the translation]. When it becomes like a cloth and is soaked, if necessary, do as one does with babies [that's the translation].
And if there are those which are split into three angles and those from which one cures as the furrow of a thorn-apple (mistletoe), like abscesses at joints: [that's the translation].
And if there are those where one makes a round incision and other similar incisions for curing.
Those who have no head (like a superficial abscess), it is necessary that you pierce it fully [that's the translation].
When the abscess is large and it has collected much pus, if you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but only a part [that's the translation]. Then drain the abscess until the next day, then remove nothing wrong. do it repeatedly for several days, until the bone is fully healed.
Similarly, if the patient is weak, or a woman, or small children, or old and decrepit men. The sphincter sometimes jerks with the discharge of pus, which may accidentally cause the death of the patient, but do not worry about it.
Therefore, be careful with this chapter, and when you have pierced the abscess, suck the wound, and check if the wound from the abscess is small. and if it is a deep wound, bring linen or old cotton. and if it is a large abscess and there is much pus, then you must insert one linen or cotton swab in each until they meet.
If you have dug into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, you must fill it with old cloth or linen thread without moisture, and tie it for two days.
Then, remove the bone, and cure it with ointment until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, apply cold water and vinegar, wet the linen cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly.
If the flow of blood persists, apply governance and cure, and the powders I have mentioned in this book should be placed on the muscles or abscesses when they are very nervous. If it is winter time, and the area or abscess is very tense, you must place hot blankets and dampened woolen cloths on top of them.
And if it is summer, and the area is fatty, you must place hot blankets and dampened woolen cloths soaked in water and oil or cold wine on top of it for two days as we have said.
And then drain the abscess and the pus and heal, as necessary, until it is healed.
It is necessary to understand universally in the treatment of abscesses:
Or have I told you how one should go before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
For small abscesses coming on the head, our practice is that they are wrapped in cloths, like the one who prunes a vine, and there are many similarities.
There are some that are fat and others with moisture like boils.
And there are those who are hard and stony at the base, and there is no doubt that the arteries will not oppose.
And the operations of the cut are that you try every instrument that is called "intermissory," from which the form comes later, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, they make an incision along its length.
And when the moisture is evacuated, scrape everything without leaving any hair that contains the moisture, because it will return again if you leave anything.
Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, use water and salt, and apply it to the wound until the next day; and let those who are delayed by night stay on it.
Then repeat the cotton as before, on the second day and the third, until you know that it does not remain by night.
then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess persists without fat, squeeze it according to this shape, long; and throw your fingers into it, and remove all the scabs from all parts, and put all your care to draw out pus from where it lies.
And if the arteries oppose it (the dislocation), do as I have told you afterwards.
And likewise treat an abscess that is hard, and cut and heal it as I have told you.
Cut through the hard abscess and moisten it, as it will be easier, for there is little blood. And if any of these abscesses or head has no moisture, and among those was the abscess that I cut from an old woman's head;
And I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not break it. And if one had stabbed it with a knife, it would have caused as much damage as being hit by a stone.
In other abscesses that are near the head or at the roots of the ears, they should be opened always depending on the situation, in order to help the boil come out.
And heal them as necessary.
Often this abscess occurs at the neck, and under the armpits, and in groins, and sometimes they come from other places on the body, and they are large and connected to each other.
Each scrofula is properly within its side, as the abscess of the head and the boil at the roots of the ears, as we have said. And the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
And the appearances of these scrofulas are many. Some contain moisture, and some are malicious and refuse to obey health.
In that case, you see it well-placed at the neck, and similar in color to the body, silent on all sides and not pulsating in the neck nor the artery nor the vein, and not deep.
Then you must cut it across from above, and strip the skin of each part, and apply the two lips of the curette to the edges, if needed, as we have said in head abscesses.
pull it slowly and carefully ensure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and be neither too sharp nor cutting too deep, so as not to injure the hand, and look ahead so as not to cut more than necessary.
And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not let you be over it, put vitriol powder in the wound, or any powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound closed. And let it be until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound softened, and begins to rot.
And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your work, until you finish it.
Then look for yourself if there remain small scrofulas, and cut them off and wash them.
And if there is a vein in the root of the scrofula large open, it is not necessary that you cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang out, without harm.
Then use old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment on the wound, then heal it.
If you excise the entire scrofula, you must gather the two edges of the wound and sew them up now because there is no room for excess due to the size of the scrofula. You must understand how to cover the root and draw pus, then sew as we have said.
You must understand how to cover the root and draw pus, then sew as we have said. For boils that have become excessive, pierce where they are softened to open.
and pierce it as described before, depending on it, then introduce tents with ointment and similar things to corrupt that which remains of the corruption. And when the wound is well cleaned, heal it with fragrant ointment until it is healed.
The ancients spoke of the shape of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land and it is the writing of their speech.
To those who have scrofula, it is necessary that the division in the throat called "epiglotte" be cut open. And no help can be given through it, because all the veins and the opening of the patient's mouth are located in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in both cheeks.
When the sickness is in the channel of the parotid gland, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte to avoid the strangulation that comes from the swelling.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it should be cut beneath three circles or four, a small slit through the center, between the two circles, or by the amount of the cut according to the size of the slit, not in the cartilage.
And if the throat is susceptible to the section of the epiglottis, there should be no cartilage and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is fearful, it should extend the skin of the throat to its entire length, then cut open the wound until it reaches the trachea. And shake out the vessels of blood, if you see anything, then press the syringe, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the section of the femoral vein that bursts through a broken limb and by the absence of voice.
Leave the wound open for a piece [of time].
And when the hour has passed where there is doubt of strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound with care, and stitch it all closed except for the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause growth of flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasim says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the flight has fled. Then press the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, thus keeping him from death.
And so, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it had passed in 3 days or 4. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and heal it, until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take a dagger and stab it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe.
And I was called to heal her, and found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood coming out of it, and knew that she had not breathed or spoken except through her throat, and the wind was flowing through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was cured;
And nothing more happened to the maiden but she regained her voice, and returned to her normal state.
Therefore I say, have no fear during the operation on the epiglottis.
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and is a large one of a greenish color, and it occurs mainly in women.
It appears in two ways: Nature and accidents;
And an artificial remedy has no effect.
And accidents are of two kinds, one is similar to fat, and the other kind is similar to an abscess coming from the artery. and there is fear, and it should not be worked on forcefully except in small cases, and it must be proved and sought after thorough examination of the patient. if you find it like fat, and it cannot be opened in any way, then crush it, as one crushes a boil, and drag it out entirely, if there is anything. examine it thoroughly, and heal it as required, until it is completely healed.
Many methods concerning us there are, which I shall describe all their likenesses;
and it is necessary that I say the whole difference that exists between knot and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is heat and fever persisting until the ebullition has passed, and the boil has healed. Then the fever and the heat subside.
With the knot there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it contains the pus, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins in the same way as a boil, and becomes swollen.
and they are according to these likenesses, whether fatty or moist, and their colors are similar as I said in the classification.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the nose, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments called "entromissoire", according to their shape and the chapter that follows.
And the method of incising abscesses for us is to take the moistest place found within the abscess and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the pus has been pierced, then as the size of the abscess dictates.
Then remove the contents, and be careful to ensure it does not burst.
If moisture flows out of a cold abscess, let it have its natural color as I said for other abscesses.
And if no moisture comes out after removing the contents, know that it is fatty; then make a cross-shaped incision, take pincers to it and gently peel back from both sides and draw the skin or coat that you pull out safely with the knot.
And if you cannot draw it out whole, draw it out piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if something remains, it comes back to us many times;
and if a little bit remains and it does not trouble you, apply the wound with some corrosive powders, hold the wound closed, place warm things on the abscess to reduce it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if it is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with lard.
And if the vein is beaten against you or something else happens quickly and you have no vitriol at hand, use crushed glass and leave it for 2 or 3 days until the wound festers, and let the boiling of the blood subside. Then return to cover what has stayed with the knot.
Here are the shapes of the intermediary tools, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small;
And there are three squares that are called "albarets", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds of them: large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses with fistula.
and they are like needles used to sew sacks, and made of citron wood, iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, and they are more skilled at closing black corborellous (a type of abscess).
large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses with fistula. large, medium, and small, according to the size of the holes (pertus).
The shapes of onions are quite similar, as you can see here:
and if the ones having three curvatures of three kinds [are present];
and if the ones having three curvatures and are also of three kinds are present;
and if the ones having two curvatures, and the ones with one curvature only, and are of three kinds are present.
And all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these tools with which we cut are sharp, and of those who do not cut at all except from one side, from which we scourge the nerves, because one does not hit the vein or the nerve.
and of these instruments are the stirrups held in loops, so that the patient does not injure himself when opening abscesses.
And they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you can see;
do not use them except in the case of swellings such as arms, legs, breasts, and wounds, and similar places.
And sometimes another small instrument is used, similar to the incision of blisters, following this shape, to drain blood. And one applies it [the cautery] sometimes to the place that is healthy to close veins and arteries, and sometimes in this large shape:
Sometimes breasts of some men swell when they begin to become corrupt, until they resemble women's breasts.
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, it must be done according to this form of the line b. up to g: then cut the fat and apply the wound with medicinal herbs warming charcoal, then bring together the two lips of the wound to stitch it up, and heal it until it is healed.
And if the breast (mammele) slants downwards and is flattened due to its size, as happens with women, then split it into two halves above, through two similar cuts. thus one part remains connected to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line 'b' to line 'g'. then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, remove the fat, and introduce what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it heals.
and if it is not healed or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment. And leave it (the affected area) until it drains the remaining flesh and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
These abscesses coming from under the buttocks are managed as hard scrofulas where they contain moisture.
Therefore, those containing moisture must be cut according to this form, from the line b up to the line g: And when the entire hole that is in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and anoint it afterwards until it heals completely.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula (scrofula is a chronic disease that causes swelling of the lymph nodes), then make an incision as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound opens up, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is blocked and the skin above it becomes adhered, there are often abscesses, and this also happens at the swollen vein with an abscess.
And if it is known in such a way that it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. And when you feel it with your hands, pull it slowly;
and if it is through the vein, then it should appear in front.
and it is foolishness to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the flesh and near the joints and neck and in many other places, and it is very large. Therefore, one must use iron treatment, and for those with head problems, the same applies, and in those who have a swelling of an artery, make an incision above the skin long enough;
then open the wound at one place and carefully separate the artery from the veins until it is exposed.
then insert an awl under it and make it pierce up to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then move the joint between the two ligaments of an intromissoir as far as the sanz isses allows, and release the abscess.
then apply the cure that induces a bough, while the ligament is shaking. then cure him with ointment after that, while he is healthy.
and if the abscess is due to a wound in the vein, then you must dye your hand that part of the abscess on the entire skin, then push the needle under the joint that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and let it have double thread, so you can draw it from the other side. then tie the abscess, as I told you, or bind one of the two parts of the ligament with thread.
And if you doubt that the thread has gone in fully, push another needle all the way through under the abscess at the incision of the first needle and hold the thread in four places;
then squeeze the abscess until the pus comes out, then squeeze the hard part and leave what is connected;
Then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply remedies of poultices and liniments until it heals.
As abscesses come in the artery and vein, they come on nerves when wounded, or from too much labor, and similar things.
This happens more often in the shoulder and the thighs where there are joints, and it is severe abscesses, and its color resembles the body's color, and it is in various conditions with pain;
And when it is being reset, the patient feels pain, but not fully within the body, but beneath the skin.
And it should be completely immobile in all directions, neither forward nor backward, nor beneath nor above, and the one in joints should not be covered by iron. It may contract by chance. And if it is at the head or forehead, make the skin with the spatula.
And if it is at the head or forehead, make the skin with the spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and strike its root.
And if it is large, suspend it at the incision, peel it, then extract the bone and close the wound with stitches, and let the cure continue until it heals.
Sometimes happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and the roots are subtle, and the heads are large.
and there are some small ones and very large ones.
and I have seen a man who had two bellies that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had small roots, and were cut open, and ran moisture continuously.
I weighed them and found one weighing 18 ounces, and the other 6, and the work in the incision shows that if you look at the patient, the article (the affected part) is white and moist and has a subtle root. If the head (of a bone) is fractured widely, have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
If the head (of a bone) is fractured widely, have the fire cautery ready in your presence. For in the thigh there are often excessive bleeding, and if it escapes without you, hasten therefore to cauterize.
and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of iron incision, take a well-made thread and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days.
then release, and do not stop tightening the thread of the ligature until the artery throbs with pain.
and if the roots are thick, be afraid to break it with the belly, but you can break half of it, then cauterize so that it does not come back.
Then treat the wound, and make sure not to cover the yellowish, weak-smelling, and milky-looking substance.
For it is an abscess enlarged, and I will come to treat the scrofula hereafter.
When the belly is filled [with something] If the pus comes from the cautery of a wound or incision in the belly and is on some of the boils, as it happens in other routes, or blood that leaks from veins or arteries as described above, or wind-inflammation;
And if it is due to the rupture of the siphon and the exit of the bowel, the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with various outlets. And if it is due to the rupture of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when you press it with your hands, it returns, and then it comes back, and by chance if it is sutured, it greatly enlarges at the opening of the wound and due to great labor.
If it is due to moisture, it is a light thing and easily opened when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it.
And if it is due to blood, the abscesses are large and hard, and filled according to a certain quantity. And if it is due to ventosity (gas), it yields to the touch, and the work is that you examine whether its appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or gas.
And if it is due to ventosity (gas), it yields to the touch, and the work is that you examine whether its appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or gas. It is necessary that you let the healing be. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the belly, you should command the patient to lean his backside, and be fully extended straight, then hold around the abdomen. then command him to push gently between your hands, then go around the area that you have held with a small spoon, then spread half of the abscess above on a large unguent. then tie it around with a strong thread or a cord made of strong silk firmly, and let the nose be bound with linen.
then open half of the extended abscess on the cord, and insert your finger, and search for the intestines. if you find it seized by the cord, then undo it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen.
And if you find the boil, take it at its base, and cut off the superfluous part of it;
And if the artery makes it contract or the vein, go around it gently, then return to your work and take two needles and insert two sharp wires through them, and place the two needles around what you have made in a cross shape so that you can pierce it;
then hold the abscess for three inches above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place until it is ready, and let the dead flesh fall off by itself; or you cut it when it is tender and can be pierced, then treat what is necessary, and let the abscess heal as we have said.
or you cut it when it is tender and can be pierced, then treat what is necessary, and let the abscess heal as we have said. Draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the joint as necessary, and bind the joint.
the boil We have said in the previous section the resemblance of scrofula, and how it should be treated with medicine, and how to remove the iron cure.
And we say the boil arises in the groin area, and great caution should be taken in its treatment, and the ancients said that when boils are present where they can be shaved like a common boil, and in the thigh, and similar places, it must all be removed when it is at the beginning.
no one ever heals them before me.
And the works, when they are in places where they can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile once.
Then make him purge if there is obvious fullness, then prepare the patient in good health for the procedure.
Then throw your onions or boilsores, and all the hairs from every part, and the bone from every part should feel nothing left;
And let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or any object, and if the bleeding makes you oppose the incision of an artery or a vein, then cauterize it until the wound is coagulated. Then heal it from another healing until it is healed.
dropisy We have said in the division the resemblances of edema, and in what way the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the medicine that is used for it, and the one that is healed by iron.
and one must not use iron in these two cases: that is to say, tympanites and yposarche (or epaschar), for it is deadly.
therefore, when treating this case of edema known as "eclites" in medicine, and the cure does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or if he has another disease besides edema, such as abdominal distension and similar things. do not use iron because there is doubt.
and if you see the patient with great strength, and he has no other disease besides edema alone, and is not too thin nor too old, then do as follows: Lift the patient upright on your hands, and the ministers press the stomach pressing the water to the lowest part of the bladder, then take the pointed spatula according to this form: And let it be cut through from the second part. and it should not be so pointed that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor should it pierce.
then look to see if the urine is diverted towards the intestines: it is necessary that you make an incision below the bladder, 3 fingers' breadth right below the navel. and if the urine is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the bladder 3 fingers' breadth.
and if it is due to obstruction, it should be on the right side, and the patient should not lie on the incision so that excess fluid does not run to the weak place.
Then pierce the entire skin with an instrument, push it, and pull your hand with the spatula between the skin and the bone to the thickness of a nail or thereabouts.
Then pierce the bone as far as the spatula reaches, which is the lower jawbone, then pull it out and insert this instrument in its place: And it resembles a silver chain, thin, and is of fine wire or light arsenic, and there is one at the part below the little piercing. and on one side, three piercings. and two on the other side, and one on the other.
and the head is cut like a quill, and it has the shape of the incision that scribes make on a quill.
Above the head is the anale, so when the instrument comes to the anus, hold it now above the instrument.
Then empty the anus, that is, either half or one third, for if you see more than what is appropriate at that time, by chance, the patient may die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he may fall flat, or approach death.
However, according to its potency and depending on the patient's condition and pulse.
Then draw the instrument and hold the juice, it is retained now due to the cauterization that stops the perforation that is on the siphac, as I have spoken about, that you pierce in this way.
Then use the instrument again on another day if you see the patient suffering, and draw a small amount of juice.
Do this every day, but do not let it become excessive until it neither grows nor there is a small amount of juice.
And if you have doubts about the patient and let too much juice accumulate, heal it with burial or hot sand, and by sweating, bathing, and sunlight, and apply wine. And the medicine for drying should be administered until he is clean, and cauterize on the stomach, the liver and the spleen after extraction of the water as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born who do not have foreskin at all, or the foreskin is small, or it is not in its place.
If it is necessary to immediately pierce through every spittle very thinly according to this form:
Then put soft cloth of linen and tie it for three or four days until he wants to urinate, then remove the cloth, let him urinate, and then replace it.
And in case there is no need for this, because the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.
The patient with a small purulent wound is to be treated with a cloth of plunged linen, as we have said, and it will swell up.
Those who do not have the cloth in their place are bleeding, because no one is born who has the cloth on the head of the penis, which means they cannot urinate before tying their penis up. And they cannot heal because the matter cannot reach the sore, and it is a bad disease.
The manner of work is that the patient lies supine on their back, with the head of the penis and its tip as flat as a feather's shaft, so that the testicles are in the middle, as it should be.
And take care to prevent bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, compress the area where blood is coming out, and heal the wound until it is healed.
boils on the penis Often this almond appears in the penis, and it is an ugly sign of sickness.
And there are both harmful and harmless ones.
It is necessary for you to take them [the things] in one continuous motion, strike and clean them all, then put soft cotton in an Egyptian ointment on top. Then heal it with diaphinicon ointment until it is healed.
If the ulcer is malignant, purple in color and weeping, you must apply a fire cautery.
When you have struck it [the thing], and the bladder is in the middle of the wound and has both parts inside and outside the skin, it is necessary to remove the bladder that is inside first. And when it [the thing] is sealed, heal it from the outside.
For when you heal it together, there is not assured that the bladder of the wound will not be pierced, and there comes blackness and corruption in its wound and wherever.
It is necessary to burn everything that is black and corrupted, then lay it on a plaster of honey and flour made from the peel of pomegranate rinds and leaves, then treat it with other treatments until it becomes healthy again.
And if bleeding comes out, bring the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cautery helps in the following combinations: This means "It is concerning blood circulation, decay.
And if the head of the penis is decayed and retracted, then you must drink or lead a cane from the penis, and make the patient urinate.
And when the skin is torn at the tip of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to a wound or an abscess, then you must shave it with the instrument of hair removal, until the ligaments are separated, and release the testicles from the penis on all sides.
And if it is painful to discuss this matter, then you must shave it with the spatula a little bit from the tip of the penis and the skin.
Then carefully press them together, and place a thin linen cloth dampened with cold water between them, so that it does not dry up immediately.
Circumcision is not the same as continuous wounds like other injuries; However, when we perform this work of our own accord and intentionally on infants, it is necessary to make the best and easiest work for healing.
I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have wanted to gather the greater part of masters and healers who were performing circumcision at that time, and their methods, and a newborn.
Since there are two layers, one of them could be cut, and by chance the other could remain below. Or the recovery is covered, and there is twice the pain, and in the healing of which from below the member is not assured.
And in the shaping of the nail by chance, the iron may slip and spoil the work, and it often happens that it doesn't need mending and I have seen this.
From the amputation which is done to all the chains of thread I have found the goodness of experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, equalize the nails evenly at all times; but ensure that the nails are well narrowed around the skin;
and the method of the first work is that you make the child understand, if he can, not to make him tie the thread around the stick except only, and then let him enjoy it in all ways you can.
then make him put it between your hands straight, and force the fingers between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see, nor any instrument.
Then place your hand on the shoulder and blow or cough, and pull it upwards until the head of the shoulder is in. Then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the dislocated joint with a double thread, then tie it below the poke to another ligament.
Then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the dislocated joint with a double thread, then tie it below the poke to another ligament. and hold it with the second ligature at the pouch and index finger, and press between the two ligaments, then remove the cough quickly and pull the head of the shoulder. then let the blood flow freely, for that is the remedy. and put powder on it and above the powder place a layer of egg white cooked with a little rose water, mixed with fresh rose oil; let it stay there until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
The form of strengths for purification is as follows:
The two shoulders should be slender and sharp, and the same size as the wrist equally:
the error in purification is when the intestines within are incised;
then you must stretch it with your nail, so that the flesh makes an abscess;
and cover it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then take tweezers, and press it.
And if it lasts more than three days, and what is below the penis swells, let it be until the abscesses calm down, and lightly scrape off the scab.
if you press it as much as you can move, and take care of the penis area, it will not harm anything.
Cure therefore the dislocated joint with powder for closed injuries as we have said in treating powders, and if one applies it excessively, it will go above but will not help.
keep the dislocation, as we have said, until it heals.
the retention of urine
Retention of urine is caused by a stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or rotten flesh, or similar things as we have said in the section.
and if the urine is not released, and you see it is retained due to a stone in or neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over his knees. and place the feet on the back, extend his abdomen from above the loins, and hold the patient flat as he can. And then the bladder's neck is compressed towards the stone above, which causes the urine to be expelled;
If it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is its shape:
And it shall be of subtle silver, light and thin like the feather of a bird; And the cable (or thread) shall be a palm and a half long, and fine at the end.
And the way of urine discharge is that you take a double thread, tie its end to a wool or cotton wad, and push the thread end into the syringe.
Wrap the superfluous wool and push it to the tip of the syringe, then oil or butter and egg yolk the syringe, and make the patient sit on a chair, and rub the bladder and penis with oil moistened with oil and water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the rod until it reaches the root of the rod, then double the rod above towards the butt.
Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and make the patient feel it coming to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order except for when the guide of where it goes is twisted.
Then wind the thread around all the wool strands little by little, and let the urine follow the thread, then pull it out, and correct the urine.
And repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient is relieved.
When scratches or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is collected there, and you see it distill liquids and medicines, do everything using the instrument called "clepsydra", and its shape is:
It is closed, and if it persists for three days. One on one side, and the other on the other side, as you see;
and the joints placed on both sides in such a way that the medicine stick closely to the shaft without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out, and pushed when necessary;
and when you see the medicine thrown into the bladder, place the head of the couester in the moisture, and draw out the trail that is inside;
if you draw out the moisture from the couester, then push the trail forcefully within; the moisture will enter it (the bladder), and will come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
and this is the shape of the subtle suppository with which you administer a suppository to the bladder.
And it is of silver or iron, and the head is higher.
and underneath the chest or the liver lies.
Then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you use to soften the bladder, then tie it between two breasts with a strong thread, and heat the bladder on fire.
then insert the head of the bladder into the anus, then press your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make it into a circle, and poke a hole in the center. Then insert a strong wire into these holes, then gather the circle as one gathers the needle, and put inside it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument.
and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing on it with your hand until the moisture comes out of the bladder.
of the stone (arrowhead or projectile)
We have said in the division the ways of stone, and extraction together with medicines;
and I have said the difference between a stone caused by rain, and all the signs, and in which stone one must work by cutting. and in the bladder, and in the vein.
And I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign that the urine jump from the bladder resembles urine in its subtlety.
and it opens a hernia, and greatly injures the patient's penis, and he suffers many times, and then binds it up. and of these jumps the foundations are destroyed;
and the healing of children is easy until they are four years old, but it is very serious in elderly people, and it is somewhat uncertain for those who are between youth and old age.
and the treatment of large stones is easier than that of small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often obstructs the search for stones.
Then take the patient by the feet, and push down and move under, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not move upwards.
Then make him sit between your hands supported, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining downwards.
then touch it and probe inside.
if you feel the stone in the cavity, hasten now to cut above the stone.
And if it does not fall out with the touch, moisten your right index finger with oil if the patient is an adult, or moist your thumb, if the patient is a young adult. and push it into its foundation, probe for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, pull it at the bladder neck.
then press with your finger and push it to where you intend to cut.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and also command him to stretch out his right hand towards the top of the testicles, and his left hand to open the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where incision is made.
Then insert the spatula-like tool, which has this shape: And make an incision between what is between the testicles and the bottom, not in the middle but along the left side of the scrotum.
And the right side should be on top of the stone, and your fingers should be close to or against the bottom, and make the cut across, so it is wide at the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
By chance, the press must be applied to the base, as its foundation, so it may jump out of place.
and know that there is always stone or angles and edges: if it is to be extracted;
and if it is swollen like a plum, round, and the point of exit is light.
To that one therefore where there are angles and edges, make the incision larger;
and if it does not jump out, you must pull up with the pliers that are like a file at the tip, to push the stone so that it does not escape; or you drive under the instrument curved at the tip.
and if you cannot deceive it in this way, you should make a small opening with a lancet, and if the edges are not cut, you should draw it out with a vitriol-coated probe.
And if there are more than one arrow, push the largest one first into the neck of the bladder, then strike it, pull it out, and afterwards the smaller ones, if there are any more.
If it is very large, then it must be cut open more widely. For two things may happen to the patient: or he dies, or urine comes out immediately through the place where the bladder cannot be sealed.
but you must make every effort to draw it out or dissect with pliers until you pull it out in pieces;
and when you have completed your work, smear the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, press it together, and cover it with a damp cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to cool down the abscess. Then hold the patient on his neck, and do not undo the bandage for three days.
And when you loosen the rope, wash the wound well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of diaphinecon and basilicon until it heals.
If abscesses grow in the wound and there is corruption of blood in the bladder and the urine is retained as if without leaping with the urine: Therefore, stick your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will cause the bladder to run and urinate.
Lift the wound from pus and inflammation and purulent matter, and help it in all ways you know, as long as it is healed.
And it is necessary that all the herbs you use in the cure, you bind the two thighs together, and place the remedies on top of them.
And if the stone is small, and it is conducted along the penis, and inserted, and the urine cannot flow out; if you follow what I say next, you will cut it many times, you are excused from the cutting for this treatment. I have already experienced this.
Take one iron rod of this shape and sharpened at four angles on one tip:
Then take the thread and tie it around the rod under the stone, so that it cannot return into the bladder.
then push the awl gently into the rod until it reaches the stone. and turn the awl slowly in the stone, little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side.
soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the rod. It will soon be broken and shoot out with the urine, and the patient will be cured.
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie the thread around the stone both below and above, then bend the rod towards the stone between the two threads, pull it out, untie the thread, and clean the frozen blood in the wound. And let the [patient] heal when he is sound.
From a woman's stone (or pelvis)
It happens that stone should be inserted in women, and if it ever occurs, the cure is painful, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
The first reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
And the second is that no skilled woman can be found who uncovers herself before mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
The third manner is that by chance no skilled woman can be found in this craft of hands.
The fourth manner is that the woman's stone (womb) is deeper than the man's, so it requires more profound cutting and causes great fear. If you need to perform such a procedure, then you must take a skilled midwife, although it may be difficult to find one, and if you cannot find one, do not hesitate to use a subtle chaste maiden;
and present a wise bailiff in the knowledge of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and he commands her to do whatever you command regarding the examination of the stone (womb). And look carefully if the woman is a virgin:
And look carefully if the woman is a virgin: Then you must press your finger or probe and search for the stone.
If she finds it, you must hold it beneath your finger and advise her to press with her left hand on the bladder near the uterus.
She must move it gently from the bladder's entrance towards the root of the thigh.
Then you should strike the stone at the root of the thigh near the middle bone, where it moves and feels the stone in that area. Do not move your finger above or below the stone, and make a small incision at first.
Do not move your finger above or below the stone, and make a small incision at first. Then push the hand (or implement) into the small of the back, if you feel the arrow, open the wound so that the arrow can exit freely, and know that there are many types of arrows.
it means small and large, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those with feathers.
know the forms to understand the cause.
And if the arrow avoids you (or "does not come out"), place pulverized vitriol at its location and hold it for an hour until the wound is cauterized.
Then return to your work when the arrow is out, and have tools that I told you for the extraction of arrows in men to help you with your task.
and if the arrow avoids you (or "does not come out"), and it is an artery that has been cut, place powder on the location and hold with tents and bindles, and do not start again, and leave the arrow and do not draw it, for there is danger of the patient dying. Then heal the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has been relieved and the wounds have healed, then return to your work until the pain subsides.
Grind aqous is not anything else but an assembly of moisture or white soap, which is beneath the cartilage of the eyes, containing the yolk.
and it is called "syfac," and sometimes it is properly in the egg white, if one thinks that it is another yolk. and it is the skin of the cartilage between the white soap (syfac) which we have said;
and this only occurs in the toe nail. And the cause of this watery hernia is weakness that comes to the testicles, and the matter spreads out.
And sometimes it comes from striking the eyes, and this moisture may have many colors: or it is a yellowish discoloration, or without redness, or black, or white fluid, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white and soft as we have said, it is an abscess, which is long like an egg and does not open the eyes, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the very fabric [of the abscess], it is an abscess like a part of an egg, and for that reason one thinks that it is another egg.
And if moisture is between the hide of the shoulders and the white flesh, one feels it well.
Therefore, to know the color of the moisture, you must probe deeply with care, as its form has been described above. Accordingly, judge what is inside based on the probe that follows.
And when we treat it with iron (cautery), the patient should be bled as much as our power allows and the state of his body requires.
Then he lies on his back on a small elevated object and covers him with many cloths.
Then he lies on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit at his right, and extend the yardstick to one of the two shoulder blades.
Then take the spatula in your left hand and cut the hide of the shoulders along its length until you reach the tip, making sure the incision is straight when cutting the hide of the shoulders up to white flesh, and carefully peel off the skin according to your ability.
Then pierce the syphac fully with water and let out all the water, then put your fingers in, and hold the syphac up.
and only touch the cavity of the bladder, but not the kidneys. carefully break or in pieces the ribs of it entirely, for if you do not break it well, the water will return.
and if the egg jumps out of your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the bladder.
then assemble the two bellies of the kidneys in a stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it heals.
and if you find the egg corrupt with another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are hanging, suspecting the discharge of blood.
Then pull on the cords to their full extension, extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the ail is assembled in two parts together, know that these are the branches. Then pull the other part equally as you did the first, then squeeze out the blood, and put linen moistened in rose oil into the wound.
Then pull the other part equally as you did the first, then squeeze out the blood, and put linen moistened in rose oil into the wound. and place another linen moistened with wine and oil on the two cords, and put fabric doubled over them, and tie it above all the cord that is in this shape.
Then take the fabric and use linen straps in this manner and sew them together into a girdle for the thighs. One of the cords should take hold at the base to the back, and the other at the handle part.
And the other two bones above the two angles, and let all the restrictions meet at the loop of the bridle.
And sometimes this ramice of cautionery is medicine in a place where the iron-sized wound is, and it is that you take the cautery knife, touch the skin there, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing water comes out.
take the cautery according to this shape, pierce that pus at once, and scrape off this thin cautery hot.
And press in all ways as you can until everything is scorched.
and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg.
and know that this work is more salvific. And guard against disorder of blood, and move those who have cuts.
If anything happens contrary to this, or if there is an abscess or bleeding or something else, then cure what happens contrary to this, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this procedure due to its horribleness, then perform perforation as I tell you, and it should be that when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that the anus is in the right place, then make the patient sit on a raised surface. therefore pierce the abscess in the part below the entire spatula-width wide and place the perforation along the length of the body.
And let the wounds be wide, so that all the sharp edges protrude.
Then place cotton on the wound, bind it, and allow the rest of the sharp edge to protrude, then heal it until the wound is healed.
If the white cloth does not allow the sharp edge to exit from the wound, then you must stick a feather or an instrument used for treating the sharp edges of abscesses into it, as described earlier.
And stretch open the wound, and know that the sharp edge returns, and it is assembled after six months or a little more; and when it is assembled as described above, then the patient will pass their days.
Know that in the cutting of this graft there are many positions to be feared, so it seems that it is better to leave it as it is.
And I will tell you the work and the appearance of an abscess.
Many abscesses come from the body or the kidneys. And it happens frequently.
It is caused by excess acidity or heat that spreads to the intestines or from blows.
The color of the abscess corresponds to the body's color. And no pain is found, but the abscess is severe.
Sometimes an abscess is hard and stony, with this color, and occasionally it comes from the artery or vein swelling.
If it is due to the artery, it can be recognized by the hot abscess swelling when you press it with your fingers. And you should not touch it.
The one caused by vein swelling can be recognized by its response to the touch of fingers and it is easy to make an incision on this appearance, as well as others. And it is that you cut the yolk of the egg, then place the egg upright, and pull the white part from the yolk, and free the suspensiony membrane of the egg from all parts around the egg.
If the egg is already boiled with these shells, then you must therefore remove the egg and break it.
And if it is in the white or in whatever is within the vessels, then you must free all of that soft part and break it completely.
And if the navel is located behind the back, you must crush everything and extract the afterbirth as we have said.
And when your work is completed, apply the wound with damp linen in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper resembling the boar's bristle, with softening of the yolks, and the patient becomes weak when he goes.
And the cure for this disease is as fearsome and dangerous as that mentioned earlier, yet we will tell you its work according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then bring the support beam under his buttocks towards your chest, with all the ropes close to the penis, and tie them tightly, stretching them out.
then cut the sharp pointed bladder-like object wide open along the vein area, until it is exposed, and then peel off from both sides as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
then insert a double-threaded needle where the vein has come out, and tie it at the first end where the blood has flowed, and then tie it to the other end. then press them evenly directly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture.
Then treat the wound as one would treat another, so that no patient's head leaks into one of the cheeks.
for if this happens to all patients, it is necessary to drain the eyes of all the patients. so that the eyes do not lose their discharge due to the incisions of the patients, and they dry up and cannot help themselves.
The consequences of this remedy are due to the section that causes feces or air, or the extension above the abdomen in the area of the anus, causing the intestines to descend from that incision to one of the eyes.
and this incision is either due to feces or extension, and these two forms come from two sources of causes:
or of blow, or jump, or break, or lifting of heavy load, and similar things;
and the signs when it is due to the stretching of the sinew, it happens gradually, over a long time, and does not happen suddenly. and the abscess is equal in size up to the full, because the sinew follows the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the surgical incision, which makes sudden pain appear at the beginning, and the abscesses are various appearing under the skin close to it, and this is due to the release of the intestines and the body's reaction to the surgery.
Sometimes the intestines come out of the circle and are retained, causing great pain to suffer by the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these iron treatments, there is fear, therefore it is advisable to escape.
And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to draw the intestine into their hand inside the wound if they can fit it in; then press on its neck between your hands and lift the legs;
then stretch the skin above, and strike all the hide of the buttocks with length; Then push the ribs of the waist upwards, one by one, as needed to open the wound, and let them be so positioned that the hands can come out.
Then flay the skin that is beneath the bones of the hips, exposing all the white fat until it becomes completely exposed on all sides.
Then insert your index finger into the area where the bone of the hip is located, between the white fat that is beneath the skin of the egg (the pelvis) and the second layer of fat, and between the second layer of fat and the area behind the egg, and between the second layer of fat.
And then move your right hand inside the pelvis and raise the white fat to your left hand, lift the egg towards the abdomen with all the white fat. And command the minister to stretch out the shoulder blade upward, and disconnect that which is forward behind the joint.
And if your fingers find the intestines rolled up or hard white lump, and if you discover anything like that, push it into the abdomen below.
Then take a needle with thick thread made of 10 threads, and push it into the back part of the lump, which is after the skin of the bladder. After the waist, then cut the head that appears with threads, until there are four threads left; then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape and tie the lump, which is after the skin of the bladder, with a strong knot of 2 parts. Then, wrap the shoulders of the fingers, and join them by two bands, so that none of the servants who nurse them can enter, except for a bandage covered abscess. and tie the rope according to the first rope length of two fingers wide, and after these two ropes leave some slack which is under the arch of the knees far from the great one by a finger. and after that [the bandage], according to the roundness that the egg carries;
then cut in the part that is under the skin of the knees, as far as the bones protrude and bend, as we have said before.
then bring moistened wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and bring the rope that we have said. And sometimes the white parts as we have said are cauterized after incision, due to fear of blood flow. For it happens many times, let the ligament stay until it chooses to loosen.
and if it delays in falling, you shall apply warm water and place that which we have said upon it until it loosens.
then treat the wound with another medicine until it is completely healed.
Of fleshy hernia
In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to perform a cure with iron.
And the old ones said that it is made like a splint attached to the bone, in this manner you bind the tendons, after cutting slightly below.
then press together and treat the abscess with that which works it, until the tendons loosen;
and heal as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Sometimes rot comes in the groin area, as we have said, and open the joints.
And do not let any of the internal organs spill from the anus, and if they do, it is a small amount, and repair them every hour;
Furthermore, if it remains too long in this place, the wound or sores may develop, until the internal organs continue to spill;
And this happens by the extension of the sore which is in the ulcers, as we have said, because it is extended, then the surrounding tissues are softened and opened.
and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before;
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: The patient lies down on his back between your hands, then strike the inflamed wound's side with a flat iron of three feet wide according to its size;
And then extract the sinus that is beneath the skin, then take the lard and place it on the apparent surface of the sinus;
And press to the full depth of the abdomen, then sew the two apparent surfaces of the sinus on top of the lard to the head of the fat. and stitch one and the other;
then take out the fat head, and do not cover the sinus nor extend the egg or any other thing, as I told you in the treatment of the hernia of the intestines; then treat it like a wound treatment.
then treat it like a wound treatment. And when you cut the threads, if they become soiled and heal the wound, until it heals completely.
The cloth is compressed, without appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are more effective in this place and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin on the buttocks
Often the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men because the testicles within are softened, and there is milk visible.
It is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, to make the patient lie down on his back, and strike the softened skin over the natural skin.
Then bring the two lips together in a stitch, and if you see, stitch the superfluous softened skin in three or four places firmly.
Then strike between the stitches, and the wound heals as other wounds do, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
the punishment
Know that cauterization is considered in our law, and therefore I would not like to speak of it in this book.
and is necessary only for two reasons:
one is that the patient in cauterization answers when asked, and in cauterization receives the cure.
And the other, because we often need to tame certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and others.
I therefore say that taming is done in two ways: Or by attraction, or by fracture.
In that which we do by attraction, let us sit the beast in hot water until its bones are softened and during. Then press it with your hand, until it is set and you no longer feel them.
Of the beating of size: You must dye the beast and press the skin of the bones with your left hand, then tie the stirrup, and strike above each bone where you have scoured them;
and leave no gap too large or the subtle gap that is on the vessels.
And this method of beating is better than that which is done by attraction, because at the time of traction, something from the bones may remain, so the beast desires lust;
Then heal the wound until it is healed.
Hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditus follows two ways among humans: One is when between the two openings there is an opening as in the female figure of nature with hair, and sometimes it discharges urine in court.
And another way it is in women, and there is above the navel as a rod, and they coit.
And the treatment of man and woman is when you cover the private parts together, and treat them as other wounds do;
In the second way, men whose urine jumps through the skin of the openings, have no treatment.
Tentigo is a private part on top of the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; And some women have them as big as a hand, and that is their treatment.
It is necessary that you stain the excess of the tendon at your hand or fingertips with it [a substance] and lightly strike it.
And do not go too deep, so that no blood flows out, then heal it with another treatment until it is healed.
And to another sore that arises at the mouth of the anus, apply it and cover it, and in case it jumps up, it will be similar to a cowpox, and for this reason they called it by the ancient name "cow disease". If you must cut it (the shoulder), as we have said before, and cure it until it is healed.
Erratic is when the nature of a woman is not perceived or if the opening is small; and it is by birth or accident due to disease that it comes about.
and it is by birth or accident due to disease that it comes about. Or it is by hot iron, or sharp needle fine or thick, and it is made completely in the marriage [operation], or in the chest, or under, or wherever it may be.
and prevent conception, childbirth, and, by chance, the flowers to grow;
and the knowledge of these things is by the look of the woman's face.
If the swelling is close to appearing, it may be at your hand or arm.
If it is a sharp needle that is near the liver, go quickly and pierce it thus:
place your two index fingers together, and the woman is above her back, spreading her legs.
then spread the two livers fully, so that the fine sharp needle is round and over the incisions.
then take wool, wet it in oil, and place it on the wound, and let the woman lie at home every day so that it does not heal [over].
And if the soft place is hard and thick, you must cut it with a tool resembling a myrtle leaf.
If the swelling is of flesh, suspend it at the onion and strike (it).
and have the bleeding remedies, as caraway, dragon's blood, incense, and together with plenty of egg.
then bring a wide bandage of linen, so that the wound cannot heal.
and thus let it be for a long time, and bring a dry tent of linen.
Then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
And when snow falls in marriage (meaning winter), it should be covered in this manner, unless the abscesses are aggravated. For an aggravated abscess that occurs during winter, one should not intervene with fire.
1. Hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins without cort (cortex) treatment, and when hemorrhoids become old, they turn into a scab.
And we have said in the previous section similar things about them, and their symptoms, and I will say here the ones that can be cured.
I say that hemorrhoids and ulcers, when they are completely in winter and cannot be felt, should not be cured by fire.
Those which are at the mouth of winter, can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold house, then heat the iron at the tongs, and strike its roots, then sprinkle powdered medicine that stops blood, such as cinnabar and dragon's blood, and similar things;
Then press her feet to the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water.
And when bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and apple peel, gall, and similar things, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and apply it as a plaster on her back.
And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If that doesn't work, make her breathe inflated bladders on the back and the breasts without cutting them;
Then take flax, wet it at the end of plantain or elder with old wine, and apply it to the place.
And when the abscess rests, heal the wound with ointment until it is healed;
And that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a sharp head, if it needs to be covered as I have said in the thelul; And then heal it until it is healthy.
Many kinds of abscess come in the marriage (procreation), such as boils and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore I must say in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes in marriage, which is not one of those abscesses that are collected with a clamp;
And if you want to know the work of iron, look and see if the abscess is acute at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. Then do not rush to puncture, but let it heal until the pain is eased;
And then make the patient sit on a chair or two small chairs where he leans, and support his back and gather his legs to the opposite sides of the leg.
And spread out his thighs, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good rope.
Then bring the ball to the right side, and introduce the tool used to open the mouth of the bladder, from which comes the shape.
And it is necessary that when you introduce this tool, that you pierce the right side first to know the depth of the bladder, so that what enters within from the tool does not go further than it should, and does not prick the patient. If the wound is larger, it is necessary to cover its depth with cloths so that the wound does not hurt.
It is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument on top, and that he stains the instrument.
And when the abscess is opened and softened by hand, it should be covered with linen cloth.
And when the bladder is emptied, you must put in the wound wet linen soaked in rose oil or dry green oil.
Place the skin of the wound over the cloth, place the cloth on the inside and outside of the wound, and on the end of the arrow place a clean wet linen soaked in vinegar or wormwood.
Then cure after two days of ointment application, as long as he is healthy;
And sometimes one raises the wound and the sore with clysterium of water and honey, and then with water or liquorice roots and Aristolochia longa should be cooked; Then return to the ointment application.
If the wound is healed in a marriage (union), it is necessary that you abstain from iron cooking, but treat it as we have said in the division.
Of childbirth First, the midwife should recognize the figure of natural birth, and signs if you see the woman pushing in the lower part, and desiring to smell the anus;
Then hasten the child to come out with force. Then recognize that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and it is the issue under the head, and the second one follows with it.
And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his abdomen so that he defecates quickly.
For when he defecates on top of his head, the second one should follow with him and clean the husband of his superfluidities through good cleansing.
And this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it sometimes comes on his feet, and the body or chest, hands, or stomach erupt, or it turns around his neck, or in other bad forms.
Therefore it is necessary that the bailiff be wise and skillful in these things, and to guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the forms in which one should help him.
If a child comes out of the head naturally, and a woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the child is weak, make her sit on a saddle, or let women hold her.
and anoint its nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, then insert the pledget (or small spatula) between its two fingers in the shape of this model: and split open the second incision, and press on the nail to force out the moisture that is inside.
and tie the woman's belly tightly until the child is born, and if it does not come out, you must cleanse her with a poultice of fenugreek with camomile oil.
then make her take and expectorate condusi (medicine), hold her mouth and nose for an hour: Straighten the intestines now.
If both hands come out (of the body), it is necessary that you gently reinsert them little by little; and if they cannot enter, put a woman on the seat, and raise her legs. then tilt the seat onto the ground, and bind the woman so she does not move during the procedure.
and if the hands cannot enter, and the intestines are dead, strike the hands with the knife that is placed before you, extract the child, and reset it (the intestines) equally.
of the issue of the child upon its feet When the intestines come out onto the feet, you must push them upward; and then twist it little by little, until it is even.
Then take the pieces and extend them little by little.
Can it jump up to the hips, if commanded, and make it vomit of condish? (In English: If commanded, can it jump up to the hips and cause it to vomit of condish?) if it jumps away, if God wills. (In English: If it jumps away, if God wills.)
And if it [the dislocation] is not as we have said, turn it gently until it is according to the natural figure. Here comes the translation: Gently turn it.
And if it does not jump away as we have experienced, say take musk-garlic of high altitude, oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind everything together in the mortar. (In English: And if it doesn't jump away as we have experienced, say take musk-garlic of high altitude, oil of sesame, melted gum, and grind everything together in the mortar.) and put it inside the woman's nature and anoint this ointment, then make her sit in a cold sweat below the ribs. (In English: And put it inside the woman's nature and anoint this ointment, then make her sit in a cold sweat below the ribs.)
And when it is softened inside, make the myrrh collar and place it underneath, and leave it for an hour. Then make him sit on the seat, then make him cough and hold his mouth and nose, and press lightly on the belly because the infant is about to come now.
From the birth of the child on its thighs When the child comes in this form, place the bailiff's hands near it. Then lay it on its neck, and hang its feet downwards, and let it lie on the bed. Fold its hands near each other, then press on the hands on its belly, and push out the cushions underneath, until it is delivered. If the child does not jump out, take its feet and move it, then move its belly upwards, and push your hands inside. And pull the child little by little; And instruct the woman to take care of herself until the children are born.
The newborn child coming out, one hand holds it from above. It is necessary to devise a way to return the hand: If it cannot be returned, make her rise and walk.
If she cannot walk, make her lie on the bed, bend her legs properly;
Then bring me the mustard poultice that I mentioned.
And if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then study on how to return the hand; Pull the child according to its natural shape, make her vomit, and instruct her to take care of herself until the children are born.
For the delivery of the child on its neck, have her spread her hands and turn her face towards the back of its mother. It is required that the bailiff grasp his hand, then turn it little by little, and pull gently.
And when it is equal, place the natural muscle balm of althea and oil upon it as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little.
And when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and command that she takes hold of herself. Make her vomit. In the same way, administer treatment to all those affected in turn.
In the same way, administer treatment to all those affected in turn. When the feces come in this manner completely from the anus, you press the rectum with your nail until the moisture is emptied.
If the infant's head is pushed against its face and neck, you press down from the buttocks so that it is not held back, and the infant dies.
Push the child inside, as far as necessary, until it is properly positioned; and command the woman to take hold of herself once.
of the twins' birth Know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four are born at once. And it is not strange, but it happens occasionally. Twins are strange things, and they do not live if they can be named.
Twins are strange things, and they do not live if they can be named. I know that they multiply excessively, and are driven by the siphac, which is connected to the uterus.
And sometimes they issue naturally like an animal giving birth, as we have said.
If they issue with difficulty, then the cure is as we have said, and let the midwife be skilled, and do quickly and gently whatever she does. And do as is fitting for salvation. of many children  --> multiple children (in this context)
Sometimes they form in the marriage from the first to the second or third or fourth or fifth or sixth or seventh, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise man. The bailiff should know this, because by chance similar things can happen; Follow as required.
of the dead child
When treating a woman with a stillborn child or an unborn child, as I mentioned in the division, and it does not come out spontaneously, and you are forced to work by hand; then you must know whether the woman is of good virtue and has no accident or fear of death.
The woman should be placed on her back, her head inclined downward, and her legs raised.
And the minister should hold her by two parts or tie her to the bed so she is not treated for the delivery of the child.
Then anoint the mouth of the mother with moist oil mixed with myrrh and comfrey and flax seeds, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and this myrrh.
Then push it gently into the socket, then look for the joints where it can be repositioned and take care that the tendons are not torn apart as they stretch over its head.
If the tendons are driven into the elbows or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or wrist or near the sides, and if there is tearing of the tendons, drive it or push it towards the mid-rib.
And you must grip the tendon with your right hand, place the crook between your left fingers, and push it gently to its full extent, and drive the tendon into any of the places that have been mentioned above until it reaches the empty space.
Then point against the other scythe, or whichever one you need to extract, so that the extractions are even;
and then stretch it equally by moving from one side to the other so that the scythes move out, and let the teeth of the scythe hold them, as shown in the shape:
And if there remains any part, then press one of your oil-soaked thumbs against it and push into that part, pulling the other part.
And if there remains none at all, then place this scythe or higher up and continue until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back by pressure, then you must wind around the fabric until it comes out completely. Then hold the heel at the joint of the foot or toe, and similarly you must do with the other hand, and for both feet.
If the child's hip is fat and narrow at the exit, or if it has a sharp point assembled, you must insert the pointed spatula between your fingers and push the sharp point and draw out the projection. or you will rotate it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this.
and similarly do so if the child naturally has a large head.
Then pull the bones apart with the tongs, and if the hip jumps out and it is tightened in the socket, it should be cut, as long as the moisture that is deeper inside is.
And if it cannot come out, you shall chop it into pieces as you can.
And if it is inflamed in the belly or under the ribs, then it must be pierced until the moisture escapes.
And if the swelling is on top of the feet, the attraction is slight, and the reduction to the mouth of the bladder is easy.
And if it is strangled in the belly or under the chest, then it must be opened with the glove enveloped over the hand; And the belly or chest should be cut open until the moisture which is there escapes.
And if another member is separated and the head remains, then put the thumb of the hand into the opening of the wound, and pull it out to the mouth of the wound. Then insert the finger or two and pull it further.
And if the mouth of the sore is narrowed by abscess heat that has come, it should not be worked on, instead it should be provided with moist and fat things. And apply ointments, and let them bathe in warm soothing and moistening liquids.
And if the bone is on the ribs and can be leveled, provide what was said earlier for a live infant.
And if there is no ability to do that, break it into pieces and leave nothing of the secondary part.
And when you have done this, provide what was said earlier for abscess-covered sores in the sore.
If blood flow occurs, it should be stopped by warm compression and other treatments provided.
And I saw a woman whose womb had killed an infant, then consulted another about it and revived the other infants. After a long time an abscess came to his armpit and swelled so much that it opened and started to burst.
I was called for the treatment, but I thought for a long time and could not heal the wound.
I put on strong plasters with great adhesion, and an bone came out, and after several days another one. I marvel much, because the belly has no bones.
It seemed to be the bones of a dead child.
I probe the wound, and with my hands I touch the bone until the woman is in a better position. and let the woman lie there for a long time, and thus slightly bend her leg towards the side.
I have not encountered this chapter except when masters find something strange that they know how to help with it.
Here comes the form of the press, to which we apply the books.
and turn the heads of the two screws. Moreover, the horn should be finer than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the cylinder should be wide, and the edge of the tree should be even, and a half palm long; And between the two limbs there are two shoulder joints of the same bone, which are joined firmly in both, half a palm length or a little more;
and these two joints are pushed into the mouth of the socket to open when one turns the two horns (or limbs).
Another form, with a more subtle and lighter appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, resembling pliers (or tweezers); and let the size of the two joints, as you see, be one palm length, and two fingers wide;
and when you see opening the socket with all the instruments, make the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging and legs apart, then push the two joints together into the socket, and hold the head of the instrument between her knees. Then work your hand with all the instruments as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the anvil, until the bail does what it wants.
All these instruments are covered and multiplied in their similar forms; And when the blacksmiths have prepared them, it is more eagerly worked and higher above men because of their quantity.
Do not hastily prepare the instrument without first arranging it, as its necessity is not easily excused.
When the secondine is confined in childbirth, you must command the patient to hold her anus, and then make her strain with contractions, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose. If she jumps because of that, it is good.
If not, it takes a pot, and makes a pot or lid, and places herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calamint, rue, chamomile, cascara sagrada, and centaury. all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire;
then place a cloth or lid on the pot, and hold the other end in the mouth of the wound, and press until the vapors enter the wound.
then make it vomit, as we have said. If the second one jumps quickly.
And if it remains after this treatment and does not fart, instruct the woman to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or musk oil from aloes, and then insert it into her anus and press gently. And when she has found it, take and stretch it little by little straight, so that the muscles do not resist the extraction.
but it must be moved gently to the right and to the left, and then pull. if it comes out and detaches itself.
And if the mouth of the muscle is stretched wide open, we have said the treatment for purges and fumigation with herbs.
and if it is not any of what we have said, make sure you do not force when pulling.
but it must be that the one at the mouth of the muscle, you tie it to the woman's thigh, then clysterize with an ointment formula four. If it [the dislocation] can be restored and returned, it will heal.
But nonetheless, when it [the dislocation] cannot be restored, if it comes out badly, it puts the patient in danger. Therefore, it is necessary to use appropriate fumigations for this:
Any of the ancient ones have proven fumigation of dill and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used for fumigating a woman to retain flowers and afterbirth is as follows:
And it is to be observed that it resembles a piece of glass, and the head is placed delicately in its natural position, and the larger parts are heated over the fire.
And let the fumigation be on the embers, and the heat until it is destroyed, and start another one.
Many children are born without the foundation pierced, but it has been plugged up by a subtle substance: Therefore, it is necessary for the patient to pierce that bone at its proper place, and not with a sharp splint, and ensure that the ligament is not touched.
Then put soft linen soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat with salve until it heals.
And if you doubt that it does not recur, put or place a plum stone there, and leave it for many days, and it should be removed when the patient is seen to go to bed.
And sometimes there comes this kind of swelling of sudden wound or abscess; it is necessary to cover that swelling. If it's a wound, treat it as we have said with the solution of lead.
Fistulas that come from under the foundation are knotty and larger than those that come from above the foundation, or in the space between two parts, either one fistula or more.
And when that knot is old, it works again, and moisture awakens white or subtle pus, and sometimes they become Persian fistulas.
They are known by those who have it, either excretion or flatulence when the patient makes excretions, and occasionally leaps one sidewards.
And if it is fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; They reach up to the knee joint, and up to the knuckle of the cow.
And thus, one knows a Persian fistula by its foundation, not necessarily Persian. And you press your finger or foundation into it, and push a thin needle of copper or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has tortuosity, push a tent of thin plank or horsehair against it until you feel the tent or the hair at your fingertip;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not produce pus, inflammation or worms, as we have said: know that it does not pierce. hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula penetrates up to the bladder or leads to the conduit of urine, if it shoots out urine and cannot be sealed with medicine.
If it pierces up to the knee joint, the tendon is coming out at the level: if there is no tortuosity and the pain subsides around it, then it is already bowed, and no medicine or treatment with liniment will help:
and in these Persian blisters, there is no cure but hard work, and the vain efforts of foolish people who meddle with it.
In one who is not a Persian and is not old, with hope of health through fire, as I have experienced, the patient lies between your hands on his back.
and lift the legs up to the thighs, and bend the thighs towards the stomach. then insert a tent of linen or of willow if there is curvature, as long as you know where the dislocation comes from.
If the patient feels it around the base, then you must insert your index finger there, and if it feels as though the dislocation has been pierced.
and expose where you feel the dislocated joint or bone, then know that it is dislocated. If one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
One should however know that one can heal some, but this happens seldom;
And the aid one gives to it, it is that one heats the cautery gently according to the width of the wound, as has already been said. and push everything hot into the wound until it comes out from the base; and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred pieces are burned, which resemble the quill of a bird;
and then treat it with moistened tents in butter until the charred pieces are gone, then treat it with a healing ointment that is warm and soothing.
If it can be healed well, that's good.
If the head cannot be made whole;
and if it tries to enter but does not pierce to the point that is its foundation, and between your finger and the head you put a thick covering of flesh or gauze, and you see the fistula at the head where the covering had been placed; if the tip of the fistula starts from the head and advances towards the shoulder, and then the cautery is applied afterwards until it reaches the base of the shoulder; and the shoulder will be released and will heal.
Cut off the fatty tissue that resembles a bird's feather, and none should remain.
And if the bone breaks through [the skin], and pierces you, either burn it with fire or apply a medicinal cure.
For fire cauterization has two good effects: This is to know, the arthritis of these disjointed joints, and the draining of blood and removal of moisture.
then, treat wounds soaked in butter or in crushed cheese, until the flesh is boiled in the butter, and let the joints be submerged in the butter.
then, treat the wound with onion juice mixed with hard charcoal, and use dry medicines.
When it is reset, it heals and does not dislocate again.
If a fistula comes up to the surface of the foundation and is separated from the body, push your thumb or the foundation into it and probe it.
If you feel the wound and between it is fabric or leather or joint that is about to burst, there should not be fear except for a way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you push it to the bottom, or if it is filled with pus, apply hot compresses and treat it as first.
And do not go too deep, cover the holding device that holds the foundation, and the evacuations come by their own will. then heal, as we have said.
then heal, as we have said. If by chance it becomes healthy again, remove that covering and clean it when it is removed from the foundation, either by force or with some other tool. Then mold the charrue (plow) in the wound as you can. Then study to restore the wound, and keep the fistula on the side away from the foundation.
Then study to restore the wound, and keep the fistula on the side away from the foundation. If it is easier for the patient.
And sometimes there are fistulas in this manner. When you force the tent into the fistula and it is on the side of the foundation under the skin above, take a pointed tent in its head according to this form. And put .i. thread twisted in .ij., and push the tent peg through the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is perforated on the edge of the foundation within, then draw out the thread of that pierced one, thus you press your finger or foundation.
and draw out the head of the thread, and bring together the two shoulders, and press one against the other, and leave it for a day or two.
and do not move it at any time, until the threads heal the sores that are between them, and close.
then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the fistula does not open by itself, make it open in all possible ways as you can, if it is not too deep. It is not advisable to cover a wound with a plaster while it is healing, as previously mentioned, until it is healed.
The shape of a spiked splint, from which a fistula is made, is very sharp at one end and notched. and not on the other side, because you should not touch what you should not touch, as you can see here:
Emordizes are of two kinds. They are within the foundation, as in a lump of resin, and there are both small and large ones, and on the surface there is blood, and there may be one or more, and they are displaced from the foundation and at the base of the foundation.
But those that are displaced have little moisture, and there is either a small amount of acidic citrus juice or a small amount of blood, and they have the color of flesh.
and the treatment for those that have them within the foundation is to command the patient to strain in order to relieve themselves in chambers, until the foundation settles, and this can be felt by the fingers. if you hurry up, hold it with tweezers, or grasp it with your nail, then strike at its roots.
And if the shoulder joint cannot be held due to moisture, take a cloth or linen, or a piece of silk; and straighten it [the shoulder] with your hands, then strike it [the dislocated joint], and powder some hot powders in place of cautery over it. or you can cauterize it as mentioned in the "cautery" chapter, then heal it with other treatments until it heals.
and if the foundation cannot come out [of the wound], then apply a biting and harsh enema to the patient to cleanse what is in the foundation, so that it can come out easily. if the patient washes himself and the thread [of sutures] comes out of the wound, then the treatment is simple.
if the patient washes himself and the thread [of sutures] comes out of the wound, then the treatment is simple. And it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or tweezers, strike them, then heal as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision by iron. It is necessary to apply the suturing in this manner:
It is necessary to apply the suturing in this manner: Take the twisted thread, put it in a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle, making sure it is wide enough.
tighten the thread, then knot it, pull out the needle, and do the same for all the others, leaving the excess blood to flow.
then place a moistened linen cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch on the wound foundation and place it on top, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then let it drain until it stops, and when it has ceased, treat it with salves and other remedies, until it heals.
With the drying of fevers or foundations   (It seems there might be a mistake in this line as "dou sechement" doesn't correspond to the context provided.) Often there is a drying of fevers in the intestines and due to natural constraint; and when the disease is old and medication has no effect.   (It seems there might be a mistake in this line as "sechement" doesn't correspond to the context provided.) You must puncture the bark of a willow or your fingernail on top to prevent it from getting wet. then treat it until it is healed as required.
If it cannot heal, you must shave more forcefully than before, until it heals and is barked. then treat it until it heals.
The trembling / shuddering A scab is a small appearance on the body and it goes deep.
And sometimes the scab breaks open the skin, and it feels like death trembling, and spreads throughout the body, more in the hands than other parts.
And the cure is that you take a cane from an ostrich feather, or a strong bird's feather, and place it on the patient's pulse, so that the purple circles surround the pulse completely. Then turn your hand around the whole cane so that you cover the pulse entirely and insert it deeply, and stiffen the pulse from its roots.
And if you see, do this with a cane made of iron or wood in the following shape, and be thin underneath and wide above: Do not pierce it, but hold it tightly and press it.
And if you see that the pulse needs to be cauterized as described in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes one does a silver or pitch cloister, or melted tallow or honey.
And sometimes these small and large instruments are made according to those for whom they are intended. Therefore, it is applied in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering, they are small.
Therefore, it is applied in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering, they are small. The form of the cluster is either small or large, where the belly is bound in this manner:
And it has an opening where the abdomen is sewn, as you can see, and the shoulders are pierced within.
And it has one wound on one side, and another in the other.
and the abdomen should be filled with medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small wounds, and have an interval of one space between each wound, then thread thick yarn through the wounds in the shape of an X or square, and sew up the abdomen like a goatskin. And when the medicines are inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then apply a clyster.
and this is the form of a circle.
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with caster oil or egg yolk ointment, or something similar, then gently apply it. Then the attendant should press the patient's ears between both hands until it becomes visible, then remove the ointment, and make the patient lie down with his legs exposed, if the medicine comes out, wipe it as much as possible. And if he sleeps all night, it is more helpful.
And if you plaster the patient with a belly disease of discharge, and the medication begins to heal quickly, continue to treat it until he is well.
If there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, let the ointment be as thin as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle ointment where the skin is tightened:
We have said in the section on treatment of wounds;
You will be told about treatments for hands and medicine, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what kind they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by thrusting with a spear, cutting with a sword and knife, or lance or fist or arrow, or similar objects.
Or those wounds are made according to the laws of the body, such as when a wound falls on the neck, or head, or chest, or abdomen, or liver, and similar limbs;
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for it will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from being thrust with a spear or similar objects, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the formation of an abscess, clean the wound hot: If he quickly cleanses the head itself immediately, if a little blood comes from the wound, and the cleansing is contrary to the injured part;
and the patient should empty his repleteness of wine and heavy foods.
And if he does not want to cleanse it, let his meat be reduced, and drink no wine, nor eat flesh.
and put on the wound, if an abscess grows there, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in vinegar.
and if there is no abscess hot, put on the wound if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, as I will say a little later.
And if the arm has moved it, place some hot poultices on it until it heals.
And if the wound is large, like the size of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by suturing, as I will say about wounds in the abdomen, by suturing.
If the wound is exposed of the bone, and gaping, and does not hold together, close it (the wound). Then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large foods, such as roasted meat, peas, cabbage, and similar things.
And if you find a rotten flesh or skin that is not on the bone, remove it all and let it fester, then heal (the wound).
And if there is an artery or vein in the wound or near it that cannot be stopped without cauterization, and you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if that does not help, cauterize (it).
And if the wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: and it is that you put this powder which will heal as soon as the wound has moved (healed).
And the way of the powder is: Take incense a part; blood of dragon 2 parts; Calf live in three parts, and the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and press firmly until it drains well and joins with all its blood.
Then bind it well, and let it heal on its own if it does not swell. because the medicine is not taken out until it has healed.
And at times this is done only with coal when neither incense nor dragon's blood is available, but the wound has not yet healed.
And if the wound has been opened by fire, most certainly do not put this powder on it.
but put some digested ointments or barley flour made with water and honey on it until it exudes pus. Then heal it with other treatments until it has healed.
And if a bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine forceps.
And I shall tell you after the fractures of the head.
About the wound of the neck (or throat)   (I am assuming that 'col' here means 'neck', but it could also mean 'throat'. The original French term is ambiguous in this context.)
If the wound comes or affects the neck and it is simple without any difference from that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the arteries are cut.   (The original French term 'col' is ambiguous in this context, meaning either neck or throat.)
If it is the nose, there is no other remedy than to let it heal naturally, and not to apply anything binding, because it hurts the nose and causes it to retreat. And not to put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of noses is cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But if the medicine is warm, as boiling water sweetened with rose oil, boiled and washed with gentle warm water in the same way, and other stones of that kind according to this manner, and always kept moist.
And if the wound is large, bind it with strips, then heal it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and pus-filled and swollen, pierce or lower it.
If the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then tie it off, let it lie still, and cauterize if necessary.
If the spine of the throat is cut, or the veins, and the conduit is kept, so that the flesh goes through it, then raise the vein above the throat and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. Then, apply pressure and let it be for some days, then heal it with infusions of dissolved herbs until it heals.
If the wound presses into the bone, pierce it. If there are bone fragments, pull them all out if you can, and those that you cannot, leave until the wound discharges, and align and seal the exit.
If the wound is fresh, sprinkle the powder I mentioned on it. If there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, cure as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a spear or knife wound and the injury gushes air from it, look to see where the air escapes from the wound: Know then that the wound is fatal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it at first hour nor bind it due to the blood that it may dissolve entirely, and return to the heart, and kill the patient. but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
and if you do not have an ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 or 4 days, or more. if no spasm, nor a bad tremor of heart or strange alien symptoms come. And when you see the good alignments, know that the wound is healed. Then cure the wounds and other remedies, as long as he is healthy;
And if it cannot heal, then open it, knowing that there will be a fistula.
Cure it as one should. If the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it's simple, or worse, or at the back, then cure what is in front of it. If it is large, stitch it up.
If it is small, use powder, and if it has entered the bone and there are fragments inside, open up the wound and pull out the shards if they are exposed. If they are not drained, let the wound fester, align the extractions.
And regarding other wounds on other limbs, make judgments as we have said.
The dislocation of the abdomen
The ruptures in the abdomen are great and medium-sized and small.
From a large wound, the intestines may jump out once or the nerves of the intestines, by which the insertion is made.
And the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes it is worth less to close a small wound than a large one, because you must be more careful with the intestines when closing, if not sewn carefully from inside out.
Because the intestines swell quickly when they feel pain, and therefore it is necessary to be more careful with them, and for this reason, a medium-sized wound is preferable because you are more careful to move the intestines back in place than with others.
And know that the hernia of the belly is according to four kinds:
The two common kinds occur in the abdominal hernia, and the other kinds of hernias in the other body parts have their own specific kinds.
And indeed, they are more proper with the abdominal hernia, and I will say one kind and explain it.
I say that when the hernia is small and nothing of the intestines protrudes, and it is easy to replace it, this is one of the two kinds: either because of the small size of the hernia, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in some way: Moisten a sponge or a cloth with warm water only, or cook in hot wine and cypress and spike, and anoint the intestines until the inflammation is removed.
And sometimes make this wine-based restraint, and it is mixed with sulphur to reduce swelling.
And when you see the inflammation spreading, anoint the intestines with warm or hot water, because this stops the entry of anything to a great degree.
And if it cannot enter, make a small wound with the instrument used for treating hemorrhoids;
And the first treatment is mixed with resin, and we should not cut it unnecessarily.
And this is the instrument for breaking:
It should cut inside the hump and not pierce through, and look at its shape here: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines come out, put it back in its natural shape in its proper place, if you have the power to do so, for this is necessary.
When the wound is wide and located in the lower part of the belly, it is necessary to make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head. If it is in the lower part of the belly, then put the head and feet higher than the parts below, and thus when the wound is in one of the two sides, pay attention to the fact that the affected side should be higher than the other.
And it is necessary to do what I say in large and small wounds.
In small wounds, use what is appropriate, then take the minister who has anointed all the wound with his hand and press the lips together.
and this is the common method of stitching, and you should take one needle or more, according to the size of the wound's width, then leave some space from the edge of the wound, and sew with a strong threaded needle. and pierce the two shoulders of the skin with the two needles that are beneath the skin from this side, until you make a hole through that part, and join the four edges of the skin together.
then tighten a double thread around the needle from both sides, then join the two edges of the wound together, and leave some space, and sew another stitch.
then tie the thread as you did with the first stitch, and do not stop making these stitches according to how many stitches are needed, until the entire wound is closed.
And let the needles be of medium size, neither too fine nor too coarse; for fine needles pierce all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well. because they should be of medium size;
and it is not good to insert the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and open the wound before the suture.
and then bend the heads of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and place stoppers or cloth on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sutured.
and this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, since it requires only one needle.
The second suture is common, and it consists of joining the two shoulder blades and the two breastbones together with a needle that has a strong medium thread.
and when you have pierced all four of the bones together, remove the needle from the part where you began, in the manner one does with linen.
and put some space between each suture using the thickness of a small egg.
This suture was done to a man, and I sewed up a wound that a knight had on his stomach which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and it exposed the intestines by two palms, and the wound was inside the stomach.
I brought back the intestine after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up for 15 days, healed, and became healthy.
And they had judged him to be dying, and it was a miracle;
and did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicine; and put cotton old twice a day on the wound, and washed it with water of honey until it was healed.
Now I shall tell you the two proper ways of sewing:
take the needle and thread from the outer part all the way to the inner side;
when it has pierced the skin straight through, if the end of the seam or stitch where you put the needle, and make it pierce from the inner side all the way to the outer side;
And the understanding of this stitching is that you sew it as furriers sew fur, and that you leave one opening at a time, and close it from the other side, until the stitching is completely finished.
The second way of stitching, which Galen calls specifically, is like anyone who brings together two parts naturally, and applies one end of the seam to the other end in such a manner:
insert a needle or point of the mirror nearby, and pierce only that place, and leave the two ends of the seam; then turn the needle and pierce from the outside to that inside, through the two ends of the seam;
Then pierce one and the other from the outer part up until inside, in the two shoulders that are on the opposite sides.
and this is the twisted manner of stitching and the most common.
Galen said this word, and no one denies it, one should sew the abdomen with two needles, or have thread in each.
and one must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew leather.
And know that when the wound is within the abdomen, the stitching is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
The judgement of a wound is such as the judgement of other wounds:
And when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as soon as the arrow has moved it, then reset the intestines and stitch (it).
Then put the warming charcoal powder on it, and if the arrow has moved it, then put any available ointment on it until the wound heals. and sew the threads together, and the ligature (sifac) and miret (a type of dressing). then treat the wound as others do, until it is healed.
If you don't have medicine, put old cotton on it as soon as it begins to heal, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
You have no need for other medicine in most cases where the wounds are simple.
and if you doubt that the wound will infect the main members, then you must dampen light linen in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the joints, and under the buttocks.
and if it causes pain or putrefaction in the belly, which often occurs, then cleansing with black wine can help, and especially when the putrefaction reaches the intestines.
and pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
The "youthful" intestine cannot heal when it is perforated, and this is due to the inflammation of veins that are present there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
And if the worm jumps out of the wound, put it back in the same way as the intestine, while it is still fresh.
And if it is old and turned black or dark, you should cut away the black part where blood does not come out, because there are veins and arteries there.
Then cut out what is between the ligament, and hang the two heads suspended from the part beneath the wound to align the extraction when the flesh falls off, and the wound heals.
of the rupture of the bladder
When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, because I have seen that a man was pierced or stabbed with a spear through his stomach.
And the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became a hernia and turned into a fistula, and in it was the excretion and wind.
I treat him according to what I know, and I did not stop refining until he was healthy, and the bones were healed.
And when I saw the bones heal, I feared that the patient might have something wrong in his stomach. But he had no ill, but stayed in better condition, and dieted and drank.
And the experimentalists said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: Take large forceps, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the forceps have opened the mouth, place it on the two lips so that it stretches the mouth.
And then hold the head and keep it so that it cannot be released, then place another forceps after in this manner as before until the wound is completely seized. And dress the wound.
If the head adheres in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, it can be tied with a thin thread made from the intestine of an animal in this manner:
take the head of this thread from intestine and make it smooth, then tie it to the head of a thin linen thread in a twist, then insert the thread into the needle, sew the intestine and draw out the suture.
and this method of stitching hernias is not without fear and hope.
If the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is no help or healing, but only subtlety.
Of a fistula or when it is Know that every wound or abscess, when it develops, is universally called "fistula", and likewise when it opens up and becomes hollow.
And a fistula is similar to a hard, white nodule that does not cause pain, and it is as hollow as the quill of a bird.
and sometimes clear and loose, and other times firm. Sometimes narrow, and other times wide.
And I have spoken of it in the section on wounds, that any wound which is not healed and there is no flesh, this is not without one of the nine causes. This means: by smallness of blood or body. Or by its corruption. Or because there is hard flesh within and above the lips that does not allow new flesh to grow. Or it has too much pus. When the joint is dislocated, and the matter is of bad quality; and the medicine is not good in treatment; because corruption is a kind of plague. because in the region, digestion is slow, health slows down, and it swells by nature. or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, the signs, and the remedies of medicines in the divisions.
Now I must tell you the remedy for a fistula made by handwork.
Know that fistula occurs in all the limbs of the body; because there are fistulas that come from the large veins, arteries, nerves, or the intestines, bladder, ribs, spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet. And if it comes to the property of the main member or similar joints.
All these fistulas of this kind are of grave healing, and there is but labor and ignorance in it.
And if there is any fistula which does not come up to the level that I have said, and you are confident of its cure, and you know it, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, and sew it.
And if the fistula is twisted, then search for a thin tent of lead, because lead bends with the twist.
And if the fistula has many holes and you cannot search for it with tents, then clisterize (cleanse) it through one of the holes, because moisture is short from one hole to another, and clean it.
Then feel carefully with your power if there is bone or nerve, and if it is broken in full, ask the patient clearly about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and where they feel it.
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I told you, if the fracture is transverse, then cut off the damaged and corrupted parts within.
and then cure it as long as it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply draining in the right place, then you should cut it through completely, as much as possible, then put dampened tents filled with hot medicine into it, and push them to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom.
And then apply salve unguents on the affected healthy flesh, until it is healed;
And if it is not healed by this means, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupt from the fistula, strike it.
If a vein or nerve does not hinder or affect the main limbs as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, strike it until all corruption is removed, then apply salve unguents until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and it breaks again as before, know that you are not going to the fountain:
expose and cut until you reach the bottom, remove all corruption, then restore the joint.
And if it [the shoulder] is thus healthy, it is well. And if it [the shoulder] isn't like that, know that the corruption is too advanced, so you cannot fix it; if there is no other remedy but to let it rest by nature;
and if there is a little corrupted bone and you can extract it with pliers, take it out if the instrument is suitable for that, and if there are multiple bones, take them all out, do not leave any one of them.
And if the moisture opposes you and there is no mistake or fear, press and heat and bandage the wound, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove the bones within an hour, put something irritating pus on the wound and leave it until the flesh grows around the bones, and then the bones will be easier to remove.
And if it is a large bone, like the leg or thigh, you should only cauterize the decay until all the blackness has been burned off, then heal the wound.
and if there is extensive decay, reaching down to the bone. it must be cauterized and covered up to the decay, then healed until it is closed.
And I will tell you about a fistula that occurs in the leg near the joint, so you can take it as an example and help in your work.
There was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause causing matter to come to the leg, and he developed a large abscess that could not be opened.
But the fools with their folly overdid it so that the abscesses opened up, and they became filled with matter, and it turned into a fistula, and much pus came out which caused the body to be full of wetness.
and they applied many remedies for two years without any skilled hand in the art of medicine, as long as I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the medicines they used to treat him, and it ran pus with great swelling. And the youth's body became red, and he had a citron-colored complexion.
I inserted a tent (stitch) in one of the wounds, and then I searched all the wounds, and found that some were coming towards the other from all parts of the leg.
So I hurried and inserted into one of the sores until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone within.
I appeared to me that the bone was corrupt, and I thought there was no other corruption except that which I left.
And I began to treat the wound with salty medicines for a long time, but it could not heal.
Then I began again, and opened the bone as before, and found that the corruption was continuous in the bone, and I removed it, and then left it alone, and tried to heal the place. But I could not even cover a palm of the bone, and it was torn away entirely, then I treated it with medicines. And it was healed and strengthened quickly, and there was no need to begin the work again except due to the weakness of the patient who could not endure, and due to my fear of death for him. Because of the blood evacuation, it often became healthy entirely, and grew in the bone a hard cyst, and was of good condition and had no harm or contrary effect in any way, neither at its side nor coming.
And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, it must be treated in this manner: Take a splint and bind it to the open end of the broken bone, and instruct someone to pull it upwards: and place another thicker bandage over the first one, bind it above the skin away from the bone, and pull the rotten flesh downwards to expose the healthy skin where you want it to be, so that the new skin does not puncture the old:
and place fire or a hot iron under the bone to heat the rotten flesh:
it is necessary to be patient until one can see and feel the rottenness has subsided, and be patient yet again:
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, uncover all the flesh.
Then place the iron under it, and then sew from one part to another the corruption, and let the iron tip be as long as the length of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, strike the corrupted joint, and let the bone be from the other side.
and if the corruption is between two joints, there is no remedy but to cover it.
And if the corruption is at the knuckle of the hand or foot, it is a very serious matter, but nevertheless you must investigate this corruption and how to open it. And clean it in all ways you can, but make sure that the vein or nerve do not oppose you.
And know that the cutting instruments and saws for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. And therefore, you should prepare each type of work with its appropriate tool.
And know that the work will show you the tool you will need, according to your knowledge of this craft and the signs of diseases. If you consider the tool that you require according to what is necessary.
The head may dislocate either from within or due to displacement;
and when you have applied the corrosive cure for that corruption using medicines, but it does not help, then it is necessary to cover the affected limb up to the level where the corruption occurs. This way the patient escapes death from this or from the greater evil, which is the defect of the member;
and the signs are that the limb turns black, as if it were burnt by fire. Afterwards, blackness spreads from one member to another, gradually taking over the entire body;
if you hasten to cover [it], and it is due to the bite of certain poisonous animals such as scorpions from the sea, snakes, and similar creatures; if the corruption is at the head of the penis, then cover it, but do not allow space for the venom to reach as far as the hand.
And if it reaches up to the hand, strike it at the joint, so that the corruption does not reach as far as the arm.
and if it reaches to the elbow, strike it at the bend.
and if it passes the bend, it is death, and there is no help but in the quantity of its power.
and thus do as when the corruption comes or pierces. if it comes at the first joint, strike after the other joint;
and if it pierces, strike all the way through. and if it moves into the leg, strike at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to wear out the patient with pain.
And the method for covering or sewing the limb is such that you tie it above and below, and extend one of the strips downward, and another strip upward, and you pull the flesh which is between the two strips apart with a spatula wide enough so that the bone is exposed.
Then cover or sew it with linen on both sides, so that the stitches do not touch the healthy part, and bring other harm to the patient in the form of injury and abscesses.
And if bleeding occurs during the operation, cauterize the area immediately or place some powders that restrain it on top.
Then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the limb with a strong cord and heal it until it is healthy.
And I will tell you what happens to the man lying there:
a man lying there had a blackness that seemed burned by fire, and the rotting began first in his foot, until it took all of the leg.
and when the man saw the rotting, he covered his leg with copper, and became clean.
A long time later the rotting returned to his hand, and it came to me, and I put him on remedies after cleansing the body, but the rotting could not be stopped.
And it is clear to me that I will amputate the hand, for I have no hope of healing the matter. And I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the strength of the man was weak.
And he gave up completely, returned to his earth, and struck his hand with a spade, and was healthy;
I have no knowledge of this story except for the fact that it is told in order to do something else if needed.
An abscess never comes in a charnel house and remains for such a long time that it causes a great gathering of flies; And then they run and pierce and fly away, leaving the place visible, just like a servant; The skin that is on top is as thin as woven fabric that has been torn apart, and it does not penetrate to the bone or to the nerve, and such an illness is called "sain," not "fistula";
but if it is long enough to reach the bone entirely, it is called "fistula";
and the care is that you pierce the skin all around, and likewise when it is subtle, as a linen cloth; and not for its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin has become hard and corruption is not in the entirety, and the skin is thick with pus, cure it with clysteris thus:
Look if the breasts are large, and the boils that are in it have a strong smell, then cleanse them with Egyptian medicine made as follows: take aloeswood, oil, and pitch, equal amounts, cook them in a pot over fire until the medicine becomes red and as thick as honey;
and then take some of this according to your need, make it into water and honey, and cleanse the breast, and apply pressure on the sore. leave the medicine for two hours, then strain it through a cloth;
do this several times until the breast is healed and the pus is removed.
and occasionally cleanse with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you take vine ash water, pour it on, then let it cool, and apply, until you know that the breast is well cleansed.
And if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, then let him be cleansed with water and honey or have a small amount of crushed litargyre mixed in it. or cleanse him with honey and sweetened wine, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine strengthens the blood.
and when you have done this and you are sure that the breasts have been well cleansed, cleanse them with what causes growth in them, and take a diaphytum root, grind it with rose oil and wine.
or cleanse him with various medicines and ointments, as I have said their properties for treating sores.
And if the breast ulcer is small and the probe of the cupping glass cannot enter, enlarge it with a bit of iron and put on an Egyptian ointment or basilicon until it is opened.
And if the wound is too large, let it heal on its own or allow the cupping glass to enter, and if there is a breast abscess above it, press or lower it more.
And if you cannot cover the breast with a bandage as desired, arrange it in such a way that the abscess descends to the lowest level possible, for when the abscess is full, do not let pus drain and if you cannot cover the breast with a bandage as desired. The bow string runs smoothly downwards, and do not let anything slip from the bow.
The bow string runs smoothly downwards, and do not let anything slip from the bow. and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and place it on a linen cloth that covers the entire wound. then press the forces towards the wound in a hole larger than the first one, then oint it with oil on another cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound of the bowel to align it, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days.
and the one who is on the wound of the intestine, frequently removes it to remove the bowel, and knows what will come out from the bowel, whether it is poison or too much or digested or undigested.
And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in this manner and you see the nature that rises above the wound pus, then know that the breast will certainly open up, approach the healthy.
Then loosen it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change another bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisonous worms crawl for a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
For there are men who delay applying lard in their wounds, and those who do the opposite of this;
and if he swallows food improperly from the breast after many days, know that the breast will not open up.
If the breast takes a long time to open up and is swollen, apply drying medicines that are moist in substance and dry in effect, as ointment of this kind, for there is great need of vitriol, and it is the last medicine.
Take the unguent defined, and make it with rose oil, and mix an equal amount of old wine in substance.
Then cook and use it.
and the same thing, cooked more thickened, when the unguent defined is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is above the fire.
and then apply it to the cloth, and place it on the breast, and sometimes an astrologer long is given, and roots of celestial lily, which is as flour of bread and cinnamon. and use of simple or compound medicines: grind them, make into powder, and put on the honey I said, and use.
And if the limb is long and not treated by this cure, then know that corruption has spread throughout it, and causes pressure on the bone or in hard members or ligaments. If the treatment for fistula (which we have previously mentioned).
Paranaris is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand or foot, or by chance it appears in other places.
And when it (the abscess) is neglected and no care is taken of it, if the abscess grows, it will spread and run along until it reaches the root of the nail, and possibly all of it.
And the corruption comes up to the bone, causing a stinky pain, and the toes are large and discolored.
When you treat it as we have said in the previous section and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail, followed by cauterizing the wound. The cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is intact.
If the nail penetrates the skin and starts to swell, and begins to point, you should place a reed beneath the nail so it does not pierce the skin, push it upwards, and gently and softly strike the swelling, and apply the remaining char of corrosive and burning medicine to remove everything. then heal with ointments until it heals.
If the corrosion is in the bone, strike and draw out pus, because as the bone becomes more corrupted, it cannot heal.
If you see two bones corrupting, strike them with force as mentioned before, then heal until it heals.
And if it is wounded, struck, and causes great pain, then you must first let it bleed.
Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula from the side and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, put something on it to soothe.
The patient must cauterise who is born with a growth in some people's hands by chance, which is entirely flesh, and sometimes it has bone, and occasionally it has nail; and one of these never grows from the joint root or the growth emerges from any of the fingers.
The one born inside the egg does not close its mouth, and the one born at the egg joint may or may not close its mouth.
The incision of the fleshy one is easy in this way: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
The one born at the root of the joint is difficult to treat. Keep yourself covered.
In the one born or should be in the little finger, it is necessary that you cut round the flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and treat it until it heals.
The same sores that come at the joints come together by birth, or by injury of a wound, or by burning with fire, or similar things.
You must suture that wound, so it should repair according to its natural shapes. then put between two tents or damp cloths soaked in rose oil, so they do not adhere. Or you put between two thin planks until the flesh is sutured, as it should be.
In the same way, if any of his hands comes with the palm, then strike that joint as necessary.
These are large veins swollen with melancholic fluids that come in many members of the body.
And it happens more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, rather than others.
Therefore, you must sometimes administer purge of bile, and then let it flow from the basilica (biliary duct).
The treatment with iron is according to two methods. one is by striking them and drawing out black blood. And another way is to open the vein and pull it all through.
The incision is as follows according to this manner: First, the leg is incised deeply with very hot water until the large muscle is softened, then hold the patient's leg above the calf to the part below the knee.
then cut the vein in one of the three places, with a large incision, and separate it and pull black blood to your hand from one end to another until as much blood comes out as the patient's strength can tolerate.
then tie it up and instruct him to bind himself with black vinegar-soaked meat.
And repeat the evacuation and cleaning when veins are full, it harms the patient.
The swellings of them are according to this manner: Raise the leg of the patient if it has much hair, then put it in water, and rub the leg with hot water until it turns red, and inflate the veins.
And if you don't have water, heat it with fire, then apply it to the vein along the length of the thigh or in the part below the ankle.
Then scrape the skin with a sharp edge, and peel off the vein from each side, as much as it appears when you feel it.
And one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord.
Push the probe beneath, as long as it is raised from the skin, and then cut it at an angle, then strike it in another place three inches away.
Then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then remove the probe as before, and cut it at another angle as you did before.
Then strike another size, or more if needed, then remove it, and strike the tooth at the second incision, then pull it out until the second incision.
Then pull it out by size, until it comes out entirely, then strike it.
And if you cannot draw and lift it, push an awl through its entire length, bind and pull it, and push it under the skin, then turn your hand from one side to another until it comes out. And be careful that it does not tear, for if it tears, you cannot draw or lift it, and this causes harm to the patient.
And when you have treated it all, place on the wound a linen cloth moistened with wine and rose oil. And keep treating it until it is healed.
If the eye is contracted, twisted and rolled together, not straight as we have said, you must cut it carefully but do not cover it. And pull it as we have previously said.
The shape of the iron used to pierce the vein should be curved and not cut, but should pierce it.
And is of thick curvature because if it was thin, it would pierce the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
This vein is located in the legs, in warm areas where no grass or trees grow, and in dry ground.
And by chance it may appear in places other than the legs, and this happens due to a pustule that comes from under the skin, just as it appears inside the body of snakes and eels, veins appearing between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very large inflammation comes in the leg, then the limbs change and the vein begins to burst out like a root of a plant.
When the shoulder is opened, it is necessary that you wind around a piece of wood from one and a half to two feet long, knot it, and leave the wood by the leg, and every time it comes out, you wind around the wood again and knot it.
And if it is too long, you chop off a part and wind up the rest, but do not cover it in its root, until it is all out. for if you chop it, it will go back into the flesh, causing an abscess and pus or a bad illness.
Therefore, that thing must be treated little by little until the head is reached, and nothing remains in the body.
And sometimes this vein, when treated, becomes of such length, either 5 or 10 fingers, and once a man came to me whose it was 10 fingers in length. When you open it, push the nail or finger against it and pierce through to the end, so that everything comes out;
and empty the matter that is inside, and bring healing medicinal ointment to it for three days, then treat it as with abscesses.
And sometimes this vein swells up and more so when it opens at the joint of the foot or leg, and it bleeds profusely and often bursts, causing it to jump.
Treat it then as we have said before.
worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called on our land "malady of ox", because it often happens to bulls, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, expanding and contracting, and it hurts greatly in one member after another until the skin or where it goes breaks open;
and it is infested with corruption of some humors, such as worms, snakes, lizards, or roundworms in the abdomen;
and there is doubt about its malignancy, because when it goes through the body, it rises to the head, and it may enter the eye, perhaps destroying the eye; and such things happen frequently.
When you see him to cure and drain, it can only be done when he goes:
Then you must lie him down on a hard surface with a strong and narrow rope both above and below, then strike above and drain the blood out of it completely, if it empties in full into the flesh, and you cannot stop it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it does, is that it will cause oil to run, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold a bellows under him in form, then strike above, and drain the blood out.
it is necessary for the patient to use a cleansing of the body with soluble medicines to remove evil humors and wash away stinking foods.
of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" on our land, and it is a pain that comes in some members, and then spreads from one member to another;
and I saw what I told you. I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and later on, I saw it rise like a worm at the shoulder, much faster than anything else, like a sharp knife when cutting from one place to another;
the pain left that place and dug into the shoulder, and then a little later it ran through the whole body, until it came to the other arm;
Then I told him it was turning again around the body, as I saw it.
I was greatly surprised how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this kind of disease in such a manner before. Furthermore, I wanted many that they had moved pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw it in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and because of this appeared that constricted breath.
And it did not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if she opens as we have said, lay her down quickly and then press on it until that constricted breath leaves that place. And cauterize the joint.
and if you do not see it in your eyes, then treat the one who protrudes the windbags (hernias), as with fetid pills or serapion pills, and similar things.
Arrows or needles come in different types, depending on their shapes and the parts of the body they pierce.
The differences among them are that some have large points, small ones, thick ones, and sealed (closed). and those who have two angles, those who have tongues, and those which have pieces.
and the one which falls in any member falls according to two ways: or in the principal member (the brain), like the head, heart, liver, spleen, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls [the shoulder] into any place of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you afterwards will appear to you: Then it is necessary for you to remove this arrow, as death comes after in many ways. and if this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully in, pull it out, and heal the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces the bone and there is a discharge from above the brain, is when scotomia and soreness and swelling and redness occur in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile. And sometimes without force from the nostrils, or ears. And sometimes the speech and voice are lost. And jumps from the wound white matter resembling cheese, and also as if it were bursting with boiling water.
And if this sign appears, you should refrain from treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it falls or pierces the heart is that it is near the left breast, and also as if it were embedded in a hard thing, not empty. And sometimes the arrow becomes silent like cheese, and there is black blood in the wound, followed by coldness, cold sweat, and fainting. Therefore, the patient knows for certain that death is coming.
The sign of an arrow that pierces the body is when a scab does not rise from the wound and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, breathes heavily and seeks warm air.
And if an arrow falls in the bed of the sick, it should be extracted along the sides (of the body). and produces a great discharge, a great pain, and heavy breathing. And all the limbs of the shoulders are moving.
And if the arrowhead or stomach falls out by chance, anything from the undigested flesh may jump out of the wound.
If the arrowhead or abdomen falls out and something from the intestinal tract jumps out, there is no hope in the treatment nor in the extraction of the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder, and it jumps out and comes out, and the patient feels great pain. The patient knows that the wound is fatal.
The other limbs, such as the hand, arm, neck, shoulder, backbone, waist, hips, legs, and those similar, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, for this reason you should do something else.
In a house, an arrow or spear fell into the root of the nose. I pulled it out from the other side beneath the fat of the ear and he was healed without injury.
And draw out an arrow that falls into the oil fat beneath the paper, and the arrow is stuck, and cannot be reached except the tip towards the skin, and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, to the light touch, it touched the ears.
And the game was safe, and no bad accidents happened.
And draw out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow had Arabic ears.
I was the bearded ones, and I became subtle until I drew it out, and the Christian was safe.
And draw out an arrow from the man who was wounded or in the belly, and I thought he would die;
And when he has passed XXX days, his dislocation does not change its position; I cut above the arrowhead, trapped it, and pulled it through without any mishap.
And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow lodged in his back or a wound closed over it;
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not disturb his natural positions or cause any harm in any of his natural functions.
And you wish to treat another man who has an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound is closed over it; and it remains in this way suffering great pain;
and many similar things.
And pull an arrow from the man of the kings who had fallen among the snow, and was slightly sloping to the right side; And the arrow was completely withdrawn.
I was summoned to treat her after she had fallen for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I felt her entire body with a delicate probe and did not feel anything. He feels sharp pain below his right ear.
I thought it was an arrow tip. I applied a poultice with attracting and digestive properties because the wound did not inflame. And the arrow point appeared.
And the arrow point appeared. I applied the poultice for several days, and healed the wound immediately, but the patient remained ill for a long time, feeling the arrow within his intestines.
And he told it to him. I apply the wound medicine that is corrosive to the arrowhead for many days until it opens, and then I test it, and feel the head of the arrow adhering to the place.
Then, I align in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow appears visibly.
And it passed the limits beyond four months, and then I cut open the wound that I had sewn with the pincers, and pulled it apart from both sides, and could not pull it out.
Then, I did not cease to refine and devise means of tools, until I took the pincers well made, as described at the end of this chapter, when I pulled it out and restored the wound.
And the mirror judges that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored. I will then restore it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, but place your care on this that I am not saying everything, for the books cannot cover all.
but the wise masters compare themselves on very little things, and on what is present and failing, they discover nine works, and nine tools, for the explanation of foreign things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out of the members where they are fixed except according to two ways. By the joint where they enter, or from another side.
and that which exits from there is an arrow passing through the flesh, and jumps out at times now.
And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh is healed around it, and let the exit be clean.
And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it thus for several days and move it every day;
Then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce around with all the fine iron until the bones are loosened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow has been placed within the body and cannot be seen, press as hard as you can. And if you feel it, pull it out with any suitable instrument.
And if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow because there is no bone, nerve or vein in the way, make an incision as wide as possible.
And pull the arrow out if you can, and if there are ears attached to it like a fish's spine, cut away the flesh that is stuck in by two parts as much as you can, then break or fold the ears of the arrow so you can pull it.
Carefully make sure not to break the arrow, rather pull it out more gently.
And if you cannot do it once, pull down the leg to the joints, then draw, for extraction will be easier. If bleeding from the wound opposes you, introduce what we have said in its chapter for the cure.
And protect yourself from cutting the nerve and vein, and use an instrument as you can safely pull out the arrow, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
Place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest aid that there can be; and if you cannot, place it as the signs show you.
The arrow coming from another direction pierces something of it, or the skin is swollen near where we can see or feel it.
Cut then above, as long as the pliers can grasp it, and then pull it out. If it falls out now.
And if it [the dislocation] is held within the bone, you should turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot fall out, leave it for a while and then continue the extraction until it comes out.
If it is from the arrow shaft, push it all the way in.
If it falls out and you wish to give medicine, if there is a wound, administer the instrument, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the wound.
Then push it again, and if the arrow is covered with hair, push the instrument to its tip entering in, to ease the extraction.
If the arrowhead is touching [the body], it is necessary to cut around the affected area where the poison is, if possible, then treat the wound as appropriate.
If the arrow falls out of the head or side or abdomen or bladder or chest, and it is near, and you can cover it over, do so.
And guard against cutting the vein and the nerve, then pull it out, then make the wound, if necessary. And treat it until it is healed.
The form of the tweezers used to remove arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
And there are many ways to do it: Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrowhead.
The form of the buttock hair is similar to the feathers of a bird, for pushing the point of an arrowhead, as shown here: [no further English text provided]
Of the veins that heal are thirty-one, thus it has a head sixteen, which means: The beating which are after the ears, which are called the twins "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples visible; and the veins that are in the two eyes of the ears, which are called "aspirers"; and the vein that is under the forehead; and the vein that is at the neck of the nose; and the two tendons which are on the neck; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins which are called "augheiriches"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which are commonly called five in each arm:
One is the cephalic, located on the left side of the ribcage, and common people call it "vein of the head". The middle one is called "fast", and it is made up of the cephalic and the basilic, and common people call it "vein of the heart". And the basilic is located on the right side of the ribcage, and common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the liver, and it is the one from which blood is let, which clearly opens up near the elbow.
And the savatalle is the vein that is between the ulnar and the annular, and it has two branches.
And in the leg and foot there are three veins: One is under the ribcage on the left side, and the second is the shoulder blade which is at the wrist of the right side. and the vein called "nasal," which is in the wrist of the other side;
And in the other leg are three veins beneath them.
The blood of the veins that are after the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines;
and the qualities of the bloodsayer, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient and wipe the area or veins with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a noose until two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head; When the finger joint hurts beneath your thumb, press on it firmly.
Then take the lance, and push it under the vein up to the bone, then pull your hand all along the vein above, and strike and the skin and vein well two strokes through it, and make blood come out as much as you see.
then hold it tightly until it is healed;
and I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the temples, is good for migraines, headaches, and eye diseases, and for corneas with dry eyes.
And the qualities of the healer are as I say: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, until both veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse at the base of your throat, then press firmly.
then cut the vein above your throat index, and insert the needle beneath it, and draw up the vein, and seal it, as you have done in the other two veins, and stop the bleeding according to your need.
then release the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it. and then fold it and let it heal until it is healed.
and we have spoken about its sealing and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The sanitation of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the sanitation of the skull for the diseases of the face old and new, and migration, and redness.
And the quality is that the patient turns their neck while twisting it, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this form:
And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see. Then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein when it is healthy and never use fire more than once.
Moreover, the flames should not be too sharp; And the bone is broken obliquely, because it is close, and by chance, the flame breaks when it is fine.
The sawn of the two veins that are in the eyelids helps the eyes, and at the tear-duct, and at the conjunctiva, and at the oil duct in the eye, and at facial diseases;
And the quality of their saw is that the patient stretches his neck by twisting some cord, as before;
Then the saw, and it should be the sawed bone, a little long and wide, for there is no cartilage. And if the flame is fine, by chance it may break;
Then make a dressing of blood, as much as you need, and then sew it up with cloth, and bind it well.
The cleansing of the vein from the nose is effective against headache, smallpox, and diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that appear in the face, and especially when it is old.
And the qualities of cleansing are that the patient should tighten their neck, then hold their nose with your left hand and take subtle flame long, and push it into the space between the two nostrils because the vein does not open well, and the pus will start to flow out.
and do not go too deep and let the blood flow according to your need, then leave it for a night because it recovers quickly.
The salve of the two guindges helps in the straightening of the ankle, and at the beginning of the fracture, and in mixing wounds, and in many diseases, and in stopping inflammation, and in corroding, and in herpes, and stomach ulcers;
and the quality of the salve is such that the patient stretches his neck under one and the other, as we have said;
and the master being above the patient's head, and the patient lying on the seat, then open the vein long enough a little widely, then draw out the blood moderately, or as much as necessary;
then tie up another vein, then untie the ligature, and hold the veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle; And let it (the wound) remain until morning, so that it heals.
Of the livestock health The treatment of mouth boils also helps with cold in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and cuts and sores around the mouth.
Then the quality of healing is to make the patient sit before you and hold their neck as I have said. Then turn the jaw, and look at the two holes, one is at the right jaw and the other at the left, and they can be recognized by being black, and by the small black veins surrounding them.
Hold one and the other, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, hold the larger one of each pair, and the same applies to the two holes above and below, for it is done in the same way.
Of the livestock health below the tongue The punctures below the tongue help after the puncture of the head and are for the stretching of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
And the qualities of puncturing are that the patient should sit between the sun and open his mouth, and look down on each side for a black hole.
Keep both [shoulders] healthy then, and do not go too deep [into them], because underneath are the arteries.
The veins in question are commonly healed in two ways:
Or when pricking everywhere with burning myrtle large, or olive oil subtle as you can pierce through, and is called "anesil"; and are wide and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is as wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open swollen veins full of thick blood, and containing large and turbulent blood. and this is the shape of olive oil flame:
And it is more pointedly subtle, and is for healing subtle veins where there is subtle yellowish blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are beneath the throat, and neck, and stomach.
And the lord must drain it in a clear way, and empty the artery that is below it. And if it touches the artery, and bleeding comes out, you should compress it, as I have said. And it must not be pressing the flame, but cutting it like a pincer.
If the bladder does not open manifestly, you should incise it and change another. Or you wish to drain anything from it, or you open the vein in its place on the arm. It opens manifestly. And press the flame with pincers, as we have said.
If you wish to locate the place of bleeding, then you must also incise the arm, so that you touch the vein as much as you know the pulse. Then sign the joint with a hot iron, then bind the arm, and press the vein with fire. Also ensure that you do not injure the artery when you see the joint swell, as it is an artery: cut it off then.
If you see it protrude upwards like a child's urine and the limb is red and thin, know that it is not an artery: Therefore hasten then, put your thumb on top for a long time, then cut off your thumb where it becomes pale, as this often happens: bind the arm and leave it alone, let the patient not move it:
and be careful, let it not move until it is drained.
And if the artery is not stopped and it escapes, and the medicine is not present with you, then cut the artery open, for its head will recede. If the blood does not flow (back) from the wound, and it bleeds, then stop the bleeding.
Take a strip of willow bark, cut it and take one half and bind it on top until the next day.
If the blood does not flow (back) from the wound, that is good. If it does bleed, heal it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
And the stopping of bleeding should not be excessive in various positions due to the small size of the wound and the thickness of the bandage on the arm.
The vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said.
and it is necessary for the surgeon to pierce along the nerve that is below, and if it pricks too deep, and he discovers the nerve, and it swells and the patient becomes sickly, and in case it does not heal.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man due to his subtlety, then you must anesthetize the patient with the instrument. cut the nerve as far as your power allows.
If there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
The vein of the cephalic helps, which draws blood from the head and assists the eyes.
And it is necessary to cauterize by pricking with olive oil or myrtle fire, for it is the safest of all veins, because there is no nerve or artery beneath it. Furthermore, seek the easiest joint, and do not hurt anything the first time, and repeat if necessary. And by chance, the joints swell in some men, where you should seek first, but do not hurt anything.
The quality of urine is according to your thinking.
The first thing you need to know about cautery is that it should not be done except for maintaining health and avoiding future diseases.
And the cauterization should be performed in one of the three veins that are called: This means "It is to know, cephalic, fasting, and basilic. And it should be bled at the beginning of the springtime, during Lent and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And it should be bled every other day, after two or three hours.
The bleeding administered for diseases has no set time, but whenever need arises, day or night, in all hours and at any time.
And it is not necessary to bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women in childbirth for the first four months up to the seventh. Old people over sixty years old should not be treated.
And whenever anyone wants to be bled, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that they empty the intestines with a light enema if they have retained much filth, so that the veins do not release superfluous waste into the main organs.
A person who is overly salted with foods or drunk, so much that he becomes intoxicated, or urinating excessively, should not be cured.
If someone is sick after suffering from colic, vomiting, stomach upset, multiple intercourse with women, heavy labor, staying awake and fasting, or anything related to the body or weapon, they should not be treated.
Then refine the humors if the patient is obese from foods and drinks and medications, if you have that power.
Then immerse or bathe him if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood, and heal the wound around the third part of the vein as we have said.
And keep oneself from work, and from pain, and from lust, and from similar things;
And bind it and tighten, and let the laceration be higher than the one being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently pull out the thread above halfway, for if it is too tight or loose, the wound will not heal correctly.
And then rub the wound with your hands until the veins swell, and feel for them.
Then moisten the bandage with a little bit of old oil, then place your thumb of your left hand on that vein under the wound where you want to lance it, so that the vein does not break or tear when lancing.
For there are veins that run like cords in the body, and some of these have become filled with pus, so that when you place fire upon them, they shrink away from the flame and cannot open the vein, and such is one of those. If the vein opens, the wound becomes too narrow, which is why the one who draws the cord must be cautious in these matters.
But if the vein opens for the first time, that is good; If not, start again a little below that place or immediately above it, if the joint is not swollen.
And if the joint is swollen and the patient is afraid, let it rest for a day or two and do not bind the arm. Perhaps abscess pusules will come.
Do not immerse or bathe, then clean the wound if it pleases him.
And if the wound is small or shallow and you doubt that it will not bleed much as you see, trust in that very wound itself completely with direct fire.
Open a little quickly, but only when the joint is swollen; For this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the wound swelling, do not start draining pus, but put a little oil of linen on it, for it cools the body from the blood, and the linseed oil heals in this place where the oil is applied.
and administer the linen oil to each wound that you drain pus, to stop the flow of blood.
and this same thing is made of three parts and a bowl from them when it is applied to the wound. if the pus is too thick, strain it when it becomes too large.
If a large abscess comes, which often happens when the wound is not drained until this time or when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and put on the wound a wet sponge with hot vinegar and oil, and hold it for an hour.
And it is necessary that you make this after the blood flow from the vein, and if it remains in its place for some days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm. And if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh beneath it in the cavity, poultice, or similar thing.
And many times abscess and appearance at the opening of the basilica occur.
Place your hand on it then, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, this is a bad appearance. Therefore, do not place anything from what we have said, because by chance it may touch the artery without.
But make a dry plaster to harden the place, then cure it with other remedies until it heals.
And draw out blood from each person according to the quantity of its strength and the color of the blood.
If the wound is black, let it drain until it turns red; and if you see a swelling, let it become thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
For the person who is full and open, and needs bloodletting, make a larger wound, and let the veins be wide.
And for the weak one, do the opposite, and it must be drained little by little and often, and it must be drained by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this method of drainage is safe from contamination of blood and compression of nerves, and it is more effective than long draining rather than wide.
And to the one whose body needs draining, it is necessary to give soft bread soaked in grape juice beneath. If he is burned, let him be bled three or four times; and if he has a cold complexion, let him fast before the draining, with soft bread soaked in sweet syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and a fragrant syrup.
And if the wound is bleeding profusely after dislocation, it is necessary that you apply a paste of charcoal and sweet-smelling subtle syrup, and use other things as we have said in the section or chapter on fainting, for blood evacuation.
If you want to dislocate someone's arm and then relocate it at another time, when it has been weakened by much bleeding, it should be done little by little, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
And whoever wants to dislocate someone's arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong heart, should wait 9 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to be bled from another part, should be bled on the second or third day.
There is much blood within the body which has become heated, causing fever; It is necessary to draw out a large amount and widen the opening until it can pass through a funnel; then you should follow all the conditions of health, and place your hand on top of the feet when it is healthy, so that death does not come in its place, and this happens often when the healers are negligent.
and it is not necessary to dislocate the arm and draw blood again if the opening is closed, but you should press firmly. If it is bent, extend the arm as far as possible, for that would be wrong;
but let it remain healthy a second time. If you burn at the tip of the flame until the vein which is frozen opens up, and place the piece of linen soaked in vinegar on it and press lightly.
And if a vein has burst, let it be and do not compress it until the abscess is pacified.
If it requires drawing blood a second time, draw it from the same place, or another vein, or the other arm.
The vein in the arm is safer to use instead of the one in the neck because it is composed of different vessels.
And the way to heal is that the patient plunges their hand into hot water until the flesh becomes red;
Then bind it gently, so that the vein is visible, then pierce it carefully with a small needle, not wide or long.
and make the incisions wide, and prick the joint of the hand carefully, and if it does not bleed, then immerse the hand in hot water, and let the blood come out into the water until you have enough.
if it is cold, do not immerse the hand in hot water, because it makes it colder rather than warmer.
and the pricking of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are neither arteries nor nerves.
The pricking of the thumb of the right hand is useful for all liver diseases, and this is how it works:
Hold the hand, and push it into hot water, until the vein has been opened, if you can see it. and if the artery is cut through entirely, and you cover it all over, it will not hurt at all.
and do not go too deep, because the nerves are bare beneath all the skin there; then replace the hand in hot water, so that the wound does not freeze, and it cannot heal.
And when you have let the blood as much as needed, put oil and linen over the wound to heal quickly, and do this for each wound.
The purification of the hand on the left side is beneficial for the disease of paralysis, and it should be done in the same way as I told you concerning the right side.
The incision of the saphenous vein is beneficial for all the diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of phlegm, and disease of the kidneys, and the thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its artery is such that the patient must press his foot in hot water and rub on the vein until it ruptures, and tie it above the joint of the foot. And if the vein is at the ankle, then you must go upwards along the leg a great deal.
Treat the wound with a larger reed or at the ankle, if necessary.
If you treat it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and treat it through as when sewing;
And let the flames be quenched.
And if the leg cannot be extracted, place it in the water and let the vein drain well.
If the wound requires sainying for the first time, then start the second one a little above, because the flesh is salty.
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the tendon of the other limb equally.
The salted area of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its blister is worth the pain of the heel when it is hot with blood.
And the quality of his healing is that the patient immerses himself in water or a bath and strains above the ankle for four fingers while turning, because otherwise the vein will not open.
And if it opens, let him heal in all possible ways and by crossing over (it). It is better to cover it, because the wound is exposed and very sensitive to human hands.
It is better to cover it, because the wound is exposed and very sensitive to human hands. And if you do not treat it, no remedy for the wound will open or close at the back of the foot, and beware of the nerves.
Make as much pressure on the blood as you can see, then undo the bandage, put cotton on it and tie it again. It is now healed.
Blisters are made of horns, or hare's foot, or glass;
and blistering is done in two ways: To draw and attract blood, or to not wound.
And this venetization (or cauterization) which is called "not wounding" follows two ways: or it is with all fire, or without fire.
And venetization (or cauterization) which is done by wounding and bloodletting is made in 14 parts of the body, so that the one who is all head is completely in the upper part (of the body). and the others are in the neck. and the others in the two sides of the neck. and the veins below the chin. and the veins of both shoulders. and the veins above the ankles. and the veins in both arms. and the veins in both legs. And the blisters of the two shins;
And the blisters do not bleed, unless of small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason should not be opened, if one does it as with the lancing of a vein. and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor hot fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is evacuated.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to blister, or for custom, then we will administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at each time;
because there are some who, when they have to blister, have a heavy head;
And for those who find swelling and redness in their body, in their face, neck, and darkness of the eyes;
And for those who find a spot of blood in their mouth, and the tongue has swollen, and they are spitting blood; And if there are those who faint, see blood in urine and nosebleed and other similar symptoms.
When we see these signs and especially when it is in the month [of the disease], we order to bleed after 3 hours of the day.
The pain of the mouth helps with the pain in the head ... which comes to the eyes, and it is not advisable that this be after the evacuation of all the body.
And this ventilation is in the place of mouth pain, and it should not be used by those who have a cold constitution or diarrhea, because it does them great harm.
And therefore, it is not advisable for those who watch, or have a cold head disease, to use [the treatment].
And those who often heal themselves become obtuse, and for this reason, the blister should be placed a little lower due to the risk of becoming obtuse.
The ventosation (ventilation) is in the location of the sinuses in the skull and base, and for this reason it is beneficial for the narrowing of the nose passage, and for fracture of the nasal channel, and for swelling, and for congestion.
It should be pushed gently, because if it remains too tightly closed, it causes obstruction of the throat or stomach and heart.
The ventosation in the ribs of the neck is good for headaches, otalgia (ear pain), migraines, strangulation, and tooth root pain, and it is in the location of the sinuses in the basilica.
It is necessary that you command the lord to press his hand for insertion, not to hit the artery, and there should be no flow of blood.
Ventilating beneath the chin is useful for mouth diseases and for corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. and it is in the location of the sinuses of the two lips.
Ventilations of the shoulders are good for disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Ventilating the ribs is as much as three veins in the arm, because it attracts blood from these large veins.
Command the lord not to pierce too deeply, because the flesh is bare of skin, and it knows beneath black and arteries.
Ventilation above the rump is useful for hemorrhoids in the root and diseases beneath it, and the ventilator should be large and made of eagle feathers, as it needs to draw well. And possibly, if it is delicate, it would break. and causes great wounds.
The leg ulcers open widely because they draw blood from the whole body, and are like the old aches of the kidneys, and the bladder, and the scrotum; they destroy the flowers.
They are in the region of the hip bones and the wrists, and yet they weaken the body after long usage, and cause pus to appear in various conditions.
The method of applying the ulcer is to first empty it, then moisten it promptly, and apply it quickly, moving it evenly, and not stopping until you see the region turn red and swell, and open the redness of the blood.
Then heat (or cauterize), and apply the cupping glasses, and take care in the arrangement of the body, for there are some who have tender flesh and clear pores. It is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and one deep puncture. Suck lightly.
And if the flesh is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: The first time is to make a passage for the thick blood.
And if the flesh is very thick, it is necessary to strike the third time:
When we want to draw blood drop by drop, we should only prick once. And if we want a lot of blood, we reward it often:
And if the bone is thin, it should be pierced entirely, and the wound should be closed so that the pores are perforated; for those with thick and hard skin and narrow pores, you must anoint the joints of the blisters with stimulating and dissolving oil. If it is thin, use violet oil, sweet almond oil, or the oil of seed from cucumber.
And if it is in a vein, use watercress oil, lily oil, chamomile oil or other similar oils.
And if the superfluidity is large and cold, take amat oil, or balm of Gilead oil, or anise oil, and others like it.
And if the one whom you are treating has tender flesh and wide pores, no oil should be applied; instead, it should be washed after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or water of morello cherries, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or some similar.
And one who has much moisture, if he rises from bed, should do so with asafetida or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those with excess fluid should rise from old wine, or juice of blood, or the decoction of dill or chamomile, or other similar.
And it is not necessary to use a cupping glass before bathing or in bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
And one must not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he warm himself, when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Keep watch over the one who is being bled, for he is choleric, and if he lacks it, he becomes too sharp and inflamed. He should take cold things such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce and similar items. And eat lean meat, veal from a castrated bull, and moist meats.
And eat lean meat, veal from a castrated bull, and moist meats. And the one who has a cold constitution should take honey syrup, sweet-smelling wine of moderate age, and eat coarse bread, lean meat and small birds and sparrows.
And on the day when he will turn himself, he should drink more than eat;
It is necessary to give some men sometimes tricolor or musk to the wind, or after, for strengthening the main limbs; And let it be subtle, but one should not drink it if he is hot.
The wounds placed for cutting are those placed on the liver, spleen, gout, stomach and bowels, back and loins and haunches, since these limbs do not bear being cut upon or pierced except to draw blood from one member to another, as we do with the mammary glands when they swell;
to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place wounds on the stomach and bowels to reduce the limb;
And alleviate the pain when there is an obstruction or arrow, if possible, draw out the obstruction by its attracting virtue, or dislodge the arrow from its place.
Similarly, it is done when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these winds are treated empty because they are sucked dry only. And sometimes they are treated with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, as in pleurisy diseases, and in this way the wind is filled with hot water or water in which healing herbs have been cooked.
The shape of the blister to be treated with fire is as follows:
It should be two fingers wide and half a palm long, and it should pierce the middle of the wound near the muscle, as with an awl, and it should be made of linen, soft in front so that it does not irritate the patient when placed on the member.
And take in the middle of a plowshare or iron bar a yard's length for putting a candle-stand in position, and make them big or small according to the diseases and age of those who use it.
For the swellings of children are different from those of the old, and those of the thin from those of the fat.
And this swelling should be placed thus on the member.
Take the candle of wax or linen thread and place it in the swelling across the rod that is in the swelling so that the light is at the bottom of the swelling, so as not to burn the patient.
Then place it on the member and your hands should be over the hole as we have said, so that when one looks, if there is steam, remove the swelling.
And wrap it with linen as before, and renew it often if needed.
In the cupping of illness caused by pleurisy in all its acuteness, it should not have a prick or puncture, and it is only applied when it is full of water. It is placed on the affected body part only for a short time.
and this is its form:
Blisters are applied only to the parts where cupping cannot be used due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places. and in open areas of skin, such as fingers or toes, and similar places;
The quality of the blister user is that when you find blisters in clear, sweet, and healthy-looking water, you should take them;
And place them in a soft warm bath until they are familiarized, and have nothing in their bellies; Then let it be drained of blood and bled, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply leeches on it.
And when they are full and warm, if there is a place where leeches can be applied, apply them, for it is very beneficial.
If not, lift the arm (or limb) high and then let it hang down, do this well, and then sprinkle it.
And if the arms are too far from the body by the leeches, wet a linen cloth in cold water and put it on, until the leeches are dried.
And if there are no bones, place it on broken glass, or similar things, until it is boiled.
And you place half-peeled beans on it, and leave them until they adhere to the place, then it will be healed now.
and if you need more, take other soothing herbs.
And if the soothing herbs do not want to be taken, you rub the place with fresh blood, or stick a needle there until pus comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere.
And when you see that they are weeping, sprinkle some powder of aloe and of crushed silk or ashes on it, then they will stop now.
Here begins the book of fractures (breaks) This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with setting fractures and dislocations.
Learn, dear child, that the foolish man should avoid this chapter, as he will never see any ancient books or read a letter from them.
and for this reason, the knowledge is foreign in our land, as I never found anyone good at it.
and I know nothing about it, except by the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have practiced medicine based on them, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained, summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought forth, as I did in these two chapters before.
Therefore, it is necessary that we explain the summary of this book's content and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary for you to straighten the patient from one side and the other, unless anything prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infants, or old people; or if the time is not very hot, or too cold;
and do not eat cold food, meaning raw meats, or drink wine, or eat fatty foods, and do not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of abscess heat, or expansion of matter in the limb;
if the patient returns to his former government as he used it.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed on foods that cause thick stools, or have viscosity like cooked barley in water and peas, and beef, and pork, and veal, and mutton, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things. For this thick stool, the healing of the fracture is quicker.
And know that the broken bones of old people and weak ones cannot be well regained nor sutured according to their nature due to the looseness of limbs, not those who are too tender as the bones of small children.
but it has no cure, reset above the broken bone and hold the member together firmly, until it heals as it was before. and do not let him work at all, and therefore nourish him with thick meats as we have said.
And know that the fractures are various in many ways.
For the fracture of the head (skull) is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of fractures. For there is a fracture which goes towards the elbow, and another in sharpening, like the tip of a pen for writing.
For there is a fracture which goes towards the elbow, and another in sharpening, like the tip of a pen for writing. And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small split.
And in each way he should have his device, and his equipment proper for the restoration according to what memory comes to him.
And the fracture of the bone is recognized by this that the joint is twisted and opened widely, and sounded with the probe, and pressed with the hand.
And when there is no twisting or damage [to the joint], and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no breakage.
but it may have twisting, crack, or small fracture. Do not move the hand at all, but place medicine on it that comes afterwards, and then hold it gently.
And know that the breaks that are in the joint, and the two parts separated, you must now put them equally together, so that abscesses heal quickly.
and if an abscess heals quickly, let it be left for as many days as the abscess is subsided.
then put it equally in the muscle that you can easily and skillfully move, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration where there are fractures.
Then hold, as required hereafter.
If the bone is broken into pieces, let it be set with two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or at your hand if it is one of the smaller members, or with two cords, or with one cord and at your hand.
And set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the member are disjoined, if you can, reset all the additions in their places with every means possible, and make sure through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
And adjust well the two joints of the bones according to the best shapes.
Feel it with your hand if it seems not to be quite right.
Straighten it well, but do not strain it too much, nor press it as those who make it swell and contract the member through their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the member is set straight, restrain the patient from moving it, not paying attention to him neither sleeping nor waking, not turning or in any other way. And keep the limbs so secure that they feel no pain at all. For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain.
And keep the limbs so secure that they feel no pain at all. For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain. And ensure that it is placed correctly, so that it does not become twisted when it is restored.
The qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and largeness and form.
For there are small members such as fingers, thumbs, and others. You must wrap soft and thin linen cloth around it. For those that are large, such as the thighs and legs.
It is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bands embrace the entire large limb, and they hold it equally from all sides so that there is no leak.
Then wrap light bandages around it, three or four times according to the limb, and hold your hand slightly on the entire bandage, then go above the break and hold less, so that the break is held but slightly less, then move the break away a little.
soften the bandage gradually, as you take a large part of the healthy flesh, then take another bandage, and wind again directly over the broken place.
then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too loosely, as we said in the first lesson above.
Then put between the joints soft linen or cloth strips that are all even, then tie it all together with a bandage, and then place well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
If there is swelling or an abscess, put on top soothing substances for the abscess and one that reduces swelling, and leave it like that for some days.
Then tighten the splints, and they should be half the width of a thick cane or pole used for splitting wood, or reeds of palm, and according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the splint placed on the break should be a little larger and wider than the others;
And let it be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large. then pull upwards on the stitches as you did at the first joint, then tie it with thread coming from above, as in the first joint when breaking. The gap is too narrow now, make it wider.
It must be that the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and it should be of flax thread.
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their knots with twisted flax threads, and that is a great error, because the knot will not be even if it is too thin, and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each stitch.
And if the patient is pierced by the limbs of the ribs after setting them in healthy bones, place linen or flax padding beneath them to prevent swelling.
When the wound is broken and the nerves are torn, I will tell the treatment below.
And know that it is not necessary to hold bones of broken members all day long on the first day. For when the limbs are large, no needles should be inserted before five or seven days, or more, according to your certainty of the abscess healing.
And here is the method for ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation and twisting:
And it is that you take flour that is kept near the mill walls, and mix with enough egg, and put this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and apply it, and this is the common method for plaster restoring fractures in various ways, and equally for women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Another method for plaster restoring the fracture, dislocation and twisting: Take [the following]: abrasive and lardanium and vinegar and asafetida and Arabic gum and myrrh; mix them, according to recipe X. Myrrh and aloes, according to recipe V. alum VIII, [according to] recipe IX. and make it into powder, and mix it with egg yolk. If the constitution of the man is hot, use this plaster because it has good composition and quickly restores broken bones and benefits many men.
Another way to make a plaster that helps with twisting pains: take myrrh and lardanium, according to recipe X. Myrrh and aloes, according to recipe IX. The dislocation arises from any displacement of its place; therefore, it cannot move, and the limb is malformed. (This sentence seems to be a continuation of the previous one) Pound well, and crush and mix with vinegar or abundant egg, and administer it. (This sentence seems to be giving instructions for treating a dislocation)
Another way to treat a dislocation and swollen joints, and to relieve the pain that occurs, is to cut the bone with a tool, and break it. (This sentence seems to be giving additional instructions for treating a dislocation) Take new linen, wet it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place it on the joint. (This sentence seems to be giving further instructions for treating a dislocation)
This plaster does not heal, but it is good for alleviating abscess pain and bone fracture pains.
Another way to treat dislocated bones is: (This sentence seems to be introducing another treatment method for dislocations) Take dried fig leaves, and leaves of common pauper's knotweed (also known as common nettle), grind them together to make a paste.
Another method of plaster for the healing of the broken bone and for promoting the healing of the abscess. Take the root of mallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of wheat, each in equal parts;
and grind, and boil together with wine, and if the limbs are scalded, boil it with moist coriander water or broth, and apply.
Another method of amputation stronger than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the restoration of the limb. Take equal parts of the roots of mallow, flax seeds, wild sage, horehound, and meadowsweet, as well as flowers of violets and chamomile; grind them together, boil in salt water or sweet water or wine, depending on the heat of the limb and its rest period.
Hippocrates states in his book that no other substance besides a mixture of beeswax and oil should be applied to a broken limb for restoration, and it should neither be too soft nor too hard.
And Galen states that for restoring a broken limb, one should apply warm dry substances such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of applying the plaster is useful for injury and pain: Take a handful of crushed human copes or goose feathers, and equal amounts of resin and wax, and grind them together to make the plaster and apply it.
And then remove a small amount after that, ensuring the patient does not feel any pain and that the bones have not moved from their place. If you do not remove it for many days. And if pain or itching occurs at the place, without rest, swelling or inflammation, hurry and remove it immediately; leave the plaster off.
and take a light cloth, sea sponge dampened with water, dip it in water, lift the place, until the itching stops and the pain is relieved. Leave the member to rest for an hour, then put dry linen on it, dampen it with vinegar or rose oil, and tie it up tightly until you are certain the abscess has been heated.
Remove the inflammation from the member and alleviate the pain, then begin wrapping again subtly, a little plaster, and do not strain it too much as before. until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess has burst, become red, painful and swollen, and if you need plaster and linen, then suture it as you did before evenly.
And if no improvement occurs in the member as we have said, do not remove the wrapping for more than 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days. And never leave it for 20 days, as we see, until the fracture heals and the wound approaches the skin.
Then hold it more firmly than before, and swell the flesh, as I have said earlier.
If you see the joint become dry beyond what is necessary, know that nutrients cannot reach it. Therefore, immerse the joint in warm water every time you dislocate it, and do this three times a day, and slightly loosen the bandage.
By this work, then cut off the nutrients from the limb and heal quickly what the foolish doctor leaves twisted.
This is harmful, and it is a work full of fear, and I see nothing but laziness and working incorrectly.
There are many ways to break bones, and various shapes, and the reasons for them are different;
For there are fractures that are made by sword blow, and the hilt strikes the whole bone up to the shaft which is beneath the bone, just like a wedge or a ram. And this kind of fracture is called "haichure".
When the sword strikes the bone from above and pierces through it, this kind of fracture is called "absolue".
And the wounds caused by these two types of fractures can be either large or small.
And if there is a bruise filled with blood, or a wound or arrow wounds, or falling upon a stone, or similar things.
If it is a swelling that approaches the membrane underneath the bone, or it is on the bone and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound is repaired in the bone as thin as a horse's hair and the crack is small, then this kind of fracture is called "capillary".
And if the wound is made by striking a stone or falling or something similar, and it drives the bone fragment downwards, and the ends of the bones are even like smiths when they make pots over fire. If the arrow enters within (the body).
And this happens more often with those who have wet or soft bones, such as in children;
and it occurs in all these ways of fracture where small fragments are separated, as is the case with shattered bones; And I will speak about its place (the bone).
And we know all manners of breaks by the drawing on them, and the testing inquiry, and through the corruption of flesh that is above. (line-by-line translation)
The resemblance of the capillary is known by those who, when the bone is exposed and scraped above, if the break appears black. (line-by-line translation)
In the treatment of a break, take care of the patient's circumstances, and if you see any bad accident, as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, stretching, swelling, fever, the hairs coming out and reddening, and other symptoms in various dispositions, it cannot heal with doubt. (line-by-line translation)
And if you do not see an overwhelming accident, and you hope for salvation, begin the treatment.
And when the splinter first comes to you in winter, it must be removed before the fourteenth day at the bone's mouth.
And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not rot, and the accidents we have mentioned come.
And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, you must cut the divided part as follows:
And it is that you grab the patient's head, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and above the wound as much as you can, and if blood comes out to expose the bone or an abscess boils up, help with whatever is needed, and it is that you fill the place with dampened linen soaked in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess boils are calmed down, and be sure of the flow of blood. then start around the bone to cut, and this is done in two ways of work:
One method is that you make a narrow cut in front, and this is the form:
And then insert another, larger incision.
And the second method is that you have a variety of sizes, some narrow and others wide, pointed, and made of iron.
and work lightly, lest you pierce the head.
If the bone is protruding and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it, in such a way that you provide sizes with tapers, but not so deep as to go beyond the bone of the skull, and above the point there should be a margin or circle that does not let the point go beyond the bone.
and you must have more of them, so that each one comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have tapers for all cases.
And this is the form of the three ways of lancing:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place the lancet on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone has been punctured.
Then move the lancet to another spot a little after, and do this all around, then cut the space of the bone that is between the fractures, and do this more subtly than you can and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone into your hand, or any of the instruments that you have like pliers or tweezers.
And be careful not to touch the brain nor the sinus.
When you have punctured and treated the bone, it is necessary that you reset the sharpness of the bone to any other instrument resembling an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other incisors.
And if there remain any small bones, no scales, lightly separate them with the instruments. then heal the wound of tents and ointments as we have said.
And the other way of work is that which Galen said, which is more secure. and he greatly commands it, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture moves open; so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place it under the head of this concave incisor, as shown in the following figure:
And do not cut from one side, but the parts should be equally on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone.
then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly break the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is beneath.
if it is hard against the bone, break the bone lightly, for one breaks it too much and with fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the membrane, and the bone is only split from above, and there are small fragments, then after smoothing it, remove the scales with a sharp rasp, having different amounts as necessary, in order to provide the most suitable amount for each place, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Start with a large rasp, then proceed with finer ones, and do not stop until it is smooth.
In each of the other hairy growths or subtle fractures, you should apply a remedy according to its nature.
and this is something not easily answered by one who has put his study in this art.
And if the wound is exposed, you should take linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. then take another linen cloth doubled over two or three times, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. and do this more gently than you can, so as not to burden the wound, then administer another thread on top, but do not tighten it any more than necessary to cover the wound.
And let it remain for a day or two, until the abscess subsides, then release it, and administer medicines as with lilies, flour of wheat, incense powder, Aristolochia, and similar things.
And from these things make powder, and apply it to the wound, and administer immediately medicines without harm or bitterness.
And watch that the wound is always clean, do not leave any ointment or clotted blood on it, for when clotted blood accumulates on the brain-cloth, it will rot and corrupt, causing great harm to the patient.
For if anything bitter is applied to it, it will rot from above. Then take care, if any harmful event befalls the patient as we have said, it is full of doubtful meaning.
And if blackness does not come violently except for the medicine that has been put on it, which possesses such power, then you should take a part of honey, and 3 parts of rose oil, and mix them with linen cloth, and apply it on the affected area. Then you should treat it according to the methods of treatments that are necessary, until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above can be broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones;
and the one beneath is cartilage, and does not break, unless it causes a blow or twisting, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should place your little finger or thumb into the nose, and align the break within your index finger's tip, and at the back of the nose, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, so the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part near the neck and the thumb cannot reach its place, you must align it with the head of a ruler, a little bigger.
If the fracture is in two parts, then fix it in the same manner, and hasten to restore it on the first day if you can.
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then bind the end of the wound with linen cloths if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind the other side if there is a fracture there. And let the bandages be as thick as they fill the openings of the wound.
And they said any remedy that one must moisten tents with butter, and churn every day. It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary that they be moistened with egg white and flour powder mixture. Then let the tendon remain tense, until the bone hardens, and the cartilages become hardened.
And sometimes feathers of goose are used instead of tendons, and if it is soaked in wool, held with a bandage, and the break is kept, then blow on the wound while the patient breathes. or do what you think is best.
And if abscesses come to the new (opening) while you are working on it, put either beeswax or cotton wool soaked in rose oil, or a small piece of lignum aloes, there.
And if an abscess does not come, apply plaster on the outside with flour from wheat and powder of incense, mixed with egg yolk, then place light compresses on top but do not bind the feathers.
and if the break of the feathers is small, and it breaks into small pieces, take them with suitable instruments, then stitch the wound, and treat it with things that are appropriate for the purpose, such as plasters and ointments.
And if there is no wound within nor in the nose, treat it with tents, and place plasters of wool until it heals.
When the jawbone is fractured below and there is no wound outside, and the break is only displaced and not broken through to the inside, but rather bent within, this can be recognized easily.
If the fracture is in the right side, you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth: And if the fracture is in the left jaw bone, insert your right index finger and gently push the fracture inside, adjust it to the other side with the left hand and hold it steady:
And if the fracture of the jaw is dislocated in two places, then you must administer extension of two parts, equal in size.
If the teeth move or are broken, hold them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then place a collar on the fractured jaw bone and put a double cloth on it: Place a wide and long bandage or piece of leather on the jawbone, securing it above the muscles that you can reach, and tell the patient to rest and eat light foods.
And if you see the figure changes, dislocate it on the third day, then reset it to its original position. and place a plaster on top of it, with powder from the mill along with egg or flour of sesame, after you have removed the sore.
and place a thin linen plaster on top of it, and if the plaster adheres to it, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it until it heals. it often heals within three weeks.
And if an abscess comes, bring what we have said many times.
and if there is a fracture and wound together, be careful not to remove any piece of the bone; use subtle tools for removing the straws suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, you should widen it with fire as necessary.
And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, close the wound if it is wide, and put on one dressing suitable for that purpose, to promote healing until it is healed.
The forceps break multiple times before, towards the shoulder, and these fractures are in three ways:
or it is broken and dislocated in two places, and it is in several fragments, and is the easiest to restore.
or there is a fracture with an open wound.
And the work [procedure] is when there is a fracture with an open wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder which feels the forceps are broken. and the other extends the neck towards the affected area.
then make the fracture equal to your hands, so that the shape is as required, and there should be no protrusion or appearance of deformity.
And if you need to extend more, place a round ball of fabric or linen on the patient's shoulder, and it should be as large as necessary for your needs. And you shall stretch and lift the limb, and hold the shoulder with your hand, so that you align the fracture as necessary.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out of the joint because it comes in completely, then the patient must lie on their affected side, and a small pillow should be placed under the shoulder, and the attendant should push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the socket is raised.
Then direct the break to your fingers, and if there are bone fragments, it is necessary that you cut above them;
and remove the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, strike it at one of the incisions you have made. But place this instrument under the limb to support it;
and resemble a spoon, not concave, and be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
and have two handles, as you see, with one wide and the other narrow, as the wound of the injury that you made when treating the bone.
And when you are sure of the abscess being hot, if it opens, and if the wound is small, or you doubt the abscess being hot, then apply cloths and bandages to the wound, according to its size.
If abscess heating comes, wet linen in rose oil and asafoetida and vinegar, then place on top.
The splinting of the bone when it feels painful and has wounds or cuts, is that you put a bandage made from milled powder and egg yolk over the bone, place light strips on top, and put a sphere under it if needed. Then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then place two cloths on top of the strips, and apply it. Then take a narrow strip of three feet long and wide, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs out. And place the steel upon the breakage, and turn the bendil above the neck, and beneath the saddle healthy, and beneath the saddle sick. And reset from each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the breakage well, and clearly see that the steel does not move above the broken bone, if it moves, then hold it every day, and when the ligature slackens, constrain it.
And make the patient lie on his back, and place him when he sleeps a small pillow under the saddle, to lift the shoulder. If you align the breakage with the forceps using the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck and do not untie it except for a bad accident occurring, up to 20 days.
Continue the traction, if you see that it is necessary, and hold it and let it stay in place until it is restored.
And it is restored within 28 days, and in less to some men.
of the shoulder dislocation
It rarely happens that a broken or dislocated shoulder heals by itself, and it should not be left without treatment but touched.
The armature is prepared according to the shape of the fracture, and it is reset according to its natural form in all ways that you can.
Then put on the place powder from a mill with egg and soften gently, and cover it with two cloths. Then place a large and fine pillow under it, a little larger than the shoulder, and if there is any hollow space under the pillow in any part of the shoulder, fill it with soft linen padding so that the pillow becomes even.
And then bind it all with a strong great bandage, so that the limb does not move from its place, and observe the swelling every day;
And whenever it softens, bind it, and make the limb even if it is out of its place, and have the patient lie on their side;
and the shoulder should be restored within 20 or 25 days.
And when this number is completed, release it, and be careful because it is not the bone that moves easily.
And if a bone fragment protrudes in front and not below the skin, lift it up, remove the bone, and do as we have said in the fracture of the fistula to treat an abscess by heating.
of the fracture of the fistula
The thighbone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end.
And when it is broken at the joint, it declines below, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of alignment, and immediately, and sometimes vomits blood, and the fracture opens in the bone broken, and he feels it all over.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on their stomach, and puts the cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides to your hands, and carefully adjust it in all ways possible, until the figure of the bone is as it should be;
Then lay on plasters and bandages over the thin stem of salt or another light stick, and wrap it in a cloth, and place it above the broken bone so that it does not move. And turn the cord tightly around the back and hold it fast, and check every hour whether the bone has set, and if it softens, tighten it again.
and if it is necessary to undo [the bandage], due to corrosion or itchiness at the site, or pain or abscess, then hasten, undo [it], remove the plaster, and treat the area with remedies.
Then reset the plaster and hold it in place until it heals.
of a broken rib
Know that the fracture of the ribs occurs only in large ones behind the back and at the chest, and do not bend only because they are slippery. And it feels well to the investigation as required.
And the treatment is to set the break as necessary. Then apply a splint and tie it with a stick if needed.
If the fracture of the ribs is inclined downwards, it causes the patient great pain and shortness of breath, like in pleurisy, for the bone pierces the covering. And it pushes at the tips, and immediately and vomits a large amount of blood, which is a serious illness, and the ancients have put great effort into treating it.
And if those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the break outward.
We do not let hot poultices come, unless they have arrived. If they have arrived, then heal it.
And they said that one should put bellows on the wound to suck out pus, which seems reasonable. Always, there is doubt about whether the ventouse (something like a cupping glass) will draw out superfluidities to the place due to its weak positioning.
And they say that someone should cover the wound with damp linen soaked in hot oil and put bandages between the ribs to even out the swelling around it; then it should be treated with the treatment for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
If the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone which does not break the cloth, and doubt exists for the patient, then it is necessary to cut through the place of the broken rib and put an instrument under it to hold it in place.
And then it is necessary to cut the bone and draw gently, and afterwards sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat with plasters until it heals.
If an abscess has come up, place damp cloths soaked in rose oil on top of it.
And apply the remedy to the shoulder that needs an abscess, and let it lie on its side facing the affected area until it is healed.
And likewise to the spine in the back.
And when it happens to anyone, and you wish to know if it will heal or not, take notice if the hands become softened, swollen and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick with a needle, he does not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in various positions, and if the joint does not move or feel when stretched or pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and the patient should be cured, if treatment is applied.
If it appears as though the spine in the back is fractured and you wish to know whether it is healed or not, watch if the bones are softened and if there are accidents that are in hands, and if the back jumps with involuntary movement.
And when it is laid on its stomach, it jumps involuntarily. And when it is brought onto its stomach and it wants to lie down, it cannot. It means fatal. Do not labor at all in the treatment [of the dislocation].
If this incident does not happen to him, it is a lighter matter.
And the treatment is that you reward it if there is an abscess hot, placing on it oil of rose or oil from egg yolk until it is calmed;
then place upon one of the soothing and drying plasters and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on the part where there is pain, until it heals.
And if any bone should dislocate, then cover it with wax. Remove the bone, then close the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, then treat it with healing salve, until it heals.
And if the shoulder blade (the "shoulder of the cow") is broken, you push your left thumb against it and hold it even with the other hand as much as possible, then apply a splint and a wooden stick, if necessary.
Next, you pull it together, and if there is bone protruding, raise it up, remove the bone, and heal the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the ankle bone
It rarely happens that the shin bone is broken, and if it does happen, there is only a slight reduction in the head. And it is made long, bent into a curve, and applied to the painful place where it breaks.
And the resetting is such that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the break; and learn what is the break and its shape.
and if the break is only at the head, set the break equally, until it is of natural shape.
And if the break is along the length or it bends inward, make the patient lie on his stomach so that the healing of the break comes to your attention. And when you have set it equally, place the splint on it, then place a rod or wedge above it and hold the break so that it does not move.
and apply the limb beneath the ribs, until the alignment is equal. Instruct the patient to lie on his healthy side or back.
And if an abscess swells up there, do not touch it, until the swelling subsides, and place what we have said before on it. And then return to restoration, hold it as necessary, if there is no adverse event.
Of the fracture of the shoulder
The joint (adjuntoire) is between the neck and shoulder of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of the two methods:
One method is that you take a thick paste (fust) filled with larger grain, in this form:
Tie the joints with two strings, and place them on top, and hold the patient on the chair.
Then throw the broken arm over the paste, until it slips out, and have a mound of paste in the middle, then place something heavy or the assistant extends it downstream.
Then place the mirrors in equal position to each other at the patient's hands, until the breaker returns as needed.
And the other way is that you lay the patient on his bed, tie one end of the rod to his neck and command two assistants that one holds the part above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds both ends of the rod, each pulling in their respective directions.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, hold the ligament beneath the break and above the break, and extend each of the attendants to their respective parts.
And if the breaker is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put a splint underneath the joint, and the other one towards the side, under the break.
And similarly, if the breaker is towards the side, it is necessary to place a splint lightly, without labor, so that the breaker is even on the joint and on the side.
Then make the break equal, as needed, and hold it steady if an abscess does not come out.
And if an abscess comes out, do not hold it back for more than 7 days, put wool soaked in oil on it and let it be until the abscess is calm.
Then hold, and the method of holding is that you place the arm on the dislocation, then assemble the shoulder to the body, and put your hand on the shoulder or the chest.
and put the cloth, hold on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in place, unless something prevents it, or the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint than the others on the dislocation, and have space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the dislocation 3 fingers on each side.
Then hold firmly on the joints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about breaking, more strongly and less in moving away.
And if you see the position of the joints and the tying, as we have said, during the time that you are restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to heal for seven days, as we have said.
Then look every three days at the suture, to see if pus does not swell or appear in the place, or that the scabs do not come too close to the limb. If the direction, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, do not remove the sutures before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back and have his hands on his stomach.
And put a bandage of evenly-spun linen under the shoulder, and look at every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or the tendons are not softened.
if the advice is by the virtue of medicine, and he is given the meat that we have prepared before, in such a manner that the meat is first made tender. and when it begins to heal, let it be thick.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be healed within 40 days of everything. Then you must loosen it and administer baths and medicines made from camphor to direct the healing.
And if the structure is deformed and swollen, it remains to dissolve (or loosen) for days or two months.
on the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called "fosciles," one of which is small and it is the one that follows the elbow.
And the others are large, and it is this one that is under, towards the little hole.
By chance, only the large fossa (a cavity or socket-like structure in the body) is broken, or both the large and small ones together.
When the small fossae are broken, the restorations (the act of returning to its original position) and healings are easy.
And when only the large one is broken, the healing is difficult and more painful than when they break together.
If it is only the small fissure that is broken, it should be slightly stretched and made even.
If it is the large fossa, it must be pulled more strongly.
And extend it on the bone, grasp the hand pocket higher than the others, and let the small ones be lower than the others, and let the patient cross himself over it, and the bone should be in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any pain.
Then extend the minister's arm to the part below his hand, or to the elbow, and another minister at the other end above it.
And then equalize the shoulder, according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is no dislocation that pricks the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut off and remove the bone, as we have said before.
And regarding breaking into a wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter. take care (of the wound)
If, at the beginning of restoration, abscesses appear, apply the dressing made of rose oil and white beeswax, neither too hard nor too soft. and securely attach (the dressing) above it subtly until the abscesses are soothed.
And then remove the beeswax, and apply the poultice of the mill powder with egg white, then place the hot irons, and let the iron from the wound be stronger and slightly larger than the others.
And know that he must have six ribs or arms in multiple positions: either the break is in one bone, or in two.
and hold the break higher than other parts, and less when pulling it apart, as I said at the beginning of the chapter. let the bandages that are above the break be soft and moist, not hard or rough.
let the bandages that are above the break be soft and moist, not hard or rough. let the thread, with which it is bound, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And keep the limb and the joint immobilized for some days. and if any bad incident occurs in the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must irrigate the limb with hot water until the itching is alleviated.
And let the limb not be tightly rested.
Then resume the immobilization, and if the joints are weakened and the bones dislocated, as in similar cases, advise accordingly.
And if the urine cannot reach the member due to it being too narrow, then you must soften it with oil for a few days, until the urine passes through, and then tighten it.
And if none of these things that we have mentioned happen to the patient, do not discharge them for twenty days.
Wrap his hands around his neck and ensure that his neck is even. Watch for movement and displacement. Let him sleep on his back.
And know that this break is restored in thirty or thirty-five days, and by chance in twenty days, according to the mixtures and complexions of the properties.
of the fracture of the hand
For at the back of the hand and the fingers, there are few fractures, but it occurs repeatedly many times.
And when the hand's plant is broken or bent, the patient should cross his legs and sit straight in front of him evenly.
Then place the hand on a cloth and extend the broken bones, aligning them with mirrors until they are well joined.
Apply the poultice and compresses, if there is no abscess present, then place a probe according to the size of the wound. And let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
If the breakage is at the front end of the limb near the belly of the plant, make a splint from cloth, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken limb. Then bind it with a long strip of cloth, and let the splint be as thick as the palm of the hand, and bind it as necessary.
And if the break is at the edge, you must place a splint above and another beneath in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand and stop the flow of blood between the fingers.
If the breakage comes in any of the fingers, if they are bent, make it straight as necessary; and bind with the palm, and if you see that it is set, place a small straight splint to lift the breakage, and do not move it.
And if the break is at another joint, like in the index or one of the others, align it, and place the healthy bone that is next to it. Tie them all together tightly, as in a bundle, or place a splint over them, like a thong.
And be careful in the treatment and placement of the abscess heat, and heal what comes to it, as I have said.
The leg bone is often broken, and one sees this when it twists forward or backward;
and the treatment is that one ties a splint above the break, and the other below. The patient lies on their face, then each minister extends their linen equally to their part;
And this is when a fracture occurs in the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the shinbone, it is one of the ligaments towards the joint, and the other ligaments on the side of the fracture.
If it is near the knee joint, then dislocate the ligaments from the knee and extend it downwards.
Then place the mirror on the bone equal to two hands, in accordance with its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and the strap, if no abscess comes.
If there is an abscess hot, let it heal first then return to your work and treatment. The binding is made in this manner.
You must wrap over the fracture in thick double bandages and remove any excess, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the neck, and insert a long thread between the calf and the leg, under the knee, and bring the head of the thread above.
Then turn the leg and thigh together, then place the splitter on the fracture, and put an arrow on the bone of the leg.
Use fabric of soft linen between the leg and thigh to even out the fracture, then begin to bind it firmly 3 or 4 times on the splitter. and as you go up above the splitter, gradually release the pressure.
then pull the two ends of the thread you inserted between the leg and thigh, tie three splints above them, then go back down to the base of the thread, pulling it until the knot is loose.
hold it in place so that it does not move from its position, then leave it as is, ensuring no abscess or inflammation or other similar problem develops. And if it happens, dislocate it, and direct that which comes out, as we have said many times;
and if there are bone fragments that prick (or protrude), they should be cut off if possible. and if not, it must be broken and the humour drawn out. and heal as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes the thigh is broken so that splints are put on it, as in the shoulder or arm.
Nevertheless, such a restoration does not always please the patient.
And know that the thigh is restored within a few days, either less or more, according to the various complexions.
Know that in the groin region, there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
If it breaks, it is not so much a fracture, but rather a crack or perforation, and it causes all kinds of pain and injury, and this is felt very much.
And the restoration is that which equalizes the limb to its opposite, until it is assembled as much as possible.
Then put the splint, and if needed, place a round stud, and hold it as necessary, then check all the arrangements that we have mentioned in other breakages, such as an abscess or something similar. Then apply whatever is needed to each case until it heals.
of the broken leg
Know that there are two bones in the leg, of which one is correctly called "hammer", and the others are called "tarsus".
And it happens just as with a break in the arm, and for that reason the restoration is the same as for the arm, and the treatment is the same. If the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
And if the thin bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well. and turns beneath.
Then apply extension, make it even, and tie the joints equally;
However, if the fracture is ugly and there are many pieces, the extension should be less and lighter; align it according to your ability.
And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of yew wood that will splint the leg from one side to the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee down to beneath;
then wrap them in two layers and bind them above and below, and tie them in the middle so that the leg will not decline to the right or the left, and thus it is good.
And they do not administer any berse to the long part of the leg, and it is supported, and the leg is placed for restraint from movement, and properly made is what they do at the fracture or injury.
And move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident; until it heals.
of the fracture of the bones from the foot
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but there may be fracture of the bones in the foot and toes, and it has no cure except for compression in various positions.
If it happens at the foot of the fracture, and you see these bones rise against each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if he is walking, and then put your foot now on his, where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places.
Then place the pillow and stopper on top, and put below it the stomach of a sheep with a small table for two flat bones, then pull it towards the pelvis, then when you have wrapped cloths around, and other things that you may need.
And when three or four days have passed, remove the splint, because you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two are broken, restore them as we have said for the hand bones. Then place a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone and it should be slightly larger, then put below it the table I mentioned and pull it towards the pelvis.
And if there are two or three, or more broken bones, place a splint on each bone according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth and pull the table below the pelvis. And let it be standing on top of the tablecloth with the belly facing up, so that it can be treated well.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about broken bones, when we have spoken of them; Treat each case as required.
of the fracture of the wrist bone
When the bone of the female body is broken, make her sit upright, then incline her to the lower back and hold her from behind.
Then fill the hollow of the patient with cotton and put as much as necessary in it.
Then straighten the woman, and pull the lower back gently, then push the cotton until it comes to the opening of the bone, and the broken end returns with the cotton.
And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for 7 days or more. The break will be healed, and if you see, take a bladder of a sheep, attach it to the wound opening with a string, and push the entire bladder into the bone. Blow into the hollow of the neck until the bladder is full within. The nature will heal the break.
Then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for some days until it heals.
And when the bone of the arm is broken, either in a man or woman, restore it as we have said in the thighbone.
And these breaks should not be hidden from those who study and practice this art; read my book.
For breaks indicate in many ways the right way of restoration: Therefore, let us proceed.
In a spear, when it is broken, take an owl's gullet and insert the spear into it. Then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for 3 days or more, and it will heal quickly.
with break (or fracture) and wound
For that person who has a fracture with a wound (or break with wound), especially if it is large as the leg bone or shoulder blade or similar, it should be cauterized now, as the cauteries that we have mentioned bear witness.
And if the wound is healed, it should be sealed with vitriol (a disinfectant), if you have no other option, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour, or on that day, unless abscesses come.
And if an abscess bursts, allow the healing to continue until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is appeased; do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause a bad outcome.
And if the bone breaks open in the hollow of the cavity, you must set it gently and slightly extend it.
And if the dislocation does not appear to be set correctly for you to put it back into place with your hands, then align it with this instrument that is made of iron, which is 7 or 8 inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound. and therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to take 3 or 4 fingers, according to what is needed in each breakage treatment.
and be round and slightly larger than a thumb, so that it does not bend during the compression on the member for your work, and be sharp in front, and large in the middle towards the wound.
And it is called "palancha," because the curved shoulder should be placed on top of the prominent bone (of the skull). and press it once, until it returns to its place, and that it is even on both sides. If the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot grasp the bone well, then cut the head of the bone so that the instrument can take hold.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, strike it with an appropriate tool, either a chisel or a saw, to your ability.
Then remove what remains in the bone with sharpness and small shavings.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Make it return to its place, then moisten the cloth in black stiff vinegar and, if it is in summer, let it be clean. and do not put any greased cloth or other thing on the wound that may cause rot and corruption.
Then apply the splints when you have set the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover it all around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not tightened with the fracture.
And many times have fools done this, and have brought harm to the patient or death or sometimes corruption. and the binding should be softer and more flexible than other fractures.
If the wound is bad or large and you doubt that a bad accident may come about, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, do not put splints on it. But wrap it around instead of splints, with hard cloth, and tie it.
And after a day or two, if you see pus boiling at the wound, take away what you have put on it and put healing ointment on it, such as tetraformulation and similar ones.
And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and sound.
And the limbs should be prepared in such a way that the splints slide downwards gently.
And if they pass many days without healing and continue to swell again, know that there are small bone fragments; therefore, you must carefully open the wound and remove all the dislocated fragments causing the pain.
And if a fistula comes to the site, or any other kind of corruption, you must treat it, as he said in the chapter before this one.
And when the bone is broken and opened above a limb, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder, do not treat it at once, for many times death comes, but let it be until it can heal.
perhaps it heals by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can.
and if you cannot, let it be.
Often health comes after the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a terrible sight to see the appearance of the limb. And perhaps the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Therefore be careful, lest we perish. administer stiffening medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolle, acacia, and similar substances, so that you take any one of these things or all together, and grind them with a stiffening wine or with egg white or oil. And place it on the neck in a poultice, hold it tightly, and do not remove it for many days.
And place it on the neck in a poultice, hold it tightly, and do not remove it for many days. Then dislocate [the shoulder], and start again until the nodes are removed.
or hold it with a well-made piece of wood. for the property of wood is that it removes all swellings on the limbs.
and if the nodes have hardened like a stone and must be removed, hit it with a blow, making the excess appear. or you scrape [the hardened area] with any sharp object until it is removed, and cure it until it heals.
the limb that is weak after treatment
When the fracture of the bone has healed, and the limbs remain weak and fragile after it, this happens for many reasons. Because one [limb] was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; because there were too many bindings, and the nutrients could not reach the limb; When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to dryness, it cannot be put back in its place without pain. For too great movements, do not rush hourly; For because he has little blood in his body, he is weak.
And the remedy is to make the patient eat and make his body stretch out, until his blood is increased in him; and administer baths, and give joy and pleasure;
Then apply tar to the member, so that the tar attracts great heat and causes it to often swell with hot water, until the heat goes to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
the twisted limb after health When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bone is broken open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, yet it does not lose its natural function;
Do not believe the foolish who say that a limb must be broken anew, and many fools have done so in our land.
and this procedure is blamed, and great harm comes of it, and possibly death by chance.
Nevertheless, if the swelling and tortures are fresh, they should be aroused with hot water, or softening herbs such as comfrey leaves, roots, and medlots, and similar things.
and you make a mollifying plaster, as dayquillon often does, and take the comfrey oil and mix it with bear's grease or camomile oil, and apply the plaster.
You take ripe figs that are oily, grind them with wheat bran, and similar medicines that alleviate pain.
And sometimes, the dislocation is opened by continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands. Bring movement to the limb every hour.
If the spasm is aggravated and hardened, like stone, and iron treatment is required, it must be cauterized to the bone, cutting incision gently with a sharp instrument. And apply bandages and study in its care.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
If dislocation occurs in anyone, it must now be repositioned with care.
For if delayed, the wound swells, and perhaps it is reset improperly.
Therefore, it must not be moved when it is swollen: Many times brings spasms and other pains.
In any case, when it happens, make the patient purge, then leave him, until all abscesses are healed.
Then immerse the limb in warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and heal each member as healing arrives at its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of shoulder dislocations from head to feet.
The dislocation of the jaws sometimes happens in two ways, and the dislocations of both are according to two methods: or they are somewhat dislocated from their places, and softened a little. When they are completely dislocated and hang downwards, and the spittle from the mouth drips uncontrollably that it cannot be held, nor can the mouth be closed, and it wraps its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it can return in various positions more often.
And if it is complete and entire, you must reset it immediately, without delaying;
And in such a way that the minister grasps the patient's head, and presses the fingers of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on two sides; And the other hand must be spread apart, to place evenly;
Instruct the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them in all directions. And bring the thumb equal, until it returns to its place.
If it is dislocated again, then exactly if both jaws are dislocated together, anoint them with hot water and oil, until they are reset gently.
Do not be hasty in re-setting, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly and the patient's mouth is closed well, soften a round cloth made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with many threads.
The patient with the illness should lie on their back, and their shoulders should be between two pillows, so that they neither move to the right nor left nor exert themselves at all, but take light meat until the pains are removed, and the jaws are fastened.
and then eat lightly whatever they want, and do not strain at all to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaws are well fastened and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be reset in an hour and are not returned to their place, fever and usual sweats occur, and perhaps abdominal swelling, and possibly vomiting bile.
And when you see this, know that it is a loss; and many times he who experiences this dies within eight days.
The splint cannot dislocate from the side within the ribcage and is dislocated outside once at the hip, and it is felt clearly.
The treatment is that the patient lies supine on their back, and extends their arms; And then press the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return.
Then place the splint and bind it tightly.
The shoulder that is towards the back cannot dislocate. If not, and if it dislocates at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said.
Then place the splint and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
And likewise, the shoulders of the back are returned when they are dislocated from their place.
Dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the back is not dislocated except in three ways:
The first is when it dislocates at the part of the shoulder below. And the second one is at the lower part [of the body]. And sometimes it dislocates in the upper part, and this happens rarely.
It does not dislocate behind because of the shoulder blade, nor inside because of the nerves;
And many times it dislocates downward towards the anus, especially in those who have little flesh, because it leaps there quickly;
In those with enough flesh, it leaps to a small extent, and returns to its place with difficulty.
Sometimes happens to some men percussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Therefore, you must test it, until you are certain. And then you may begin the treatment.
It is known that dislocation occurs when it moves downward towards the anus, and you must distinguish between a diseased shoulder and a healthy one, and you will find clear difference between them. And you will find a hollow in the neck of the shoulder, and press down on it with the thumb at the base of the neck of the shoulder, just as if it were an eye. The patient cannot return his hand to its normal position, nor can he make any movements.
And if it is dislocated upward, it should not be concealed, for you can feel it clearly with your thumb.
And this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if the child is healthy.
The method is that the minister raises the patient's hand above, then places his hands under it, and forces the joint back into place at its proper location. And the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upwards, then places it below. It will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water. And it is given a soothing and calming ointment, like a concoction of elder and fenugreek and melilot in water, and should be applied.
Then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and a piece of cloth equal in size, not too soft nor too hard, is placed under the shoulder. Then the physician places his foot on the cloth, lifts the head of the shoulder carefully, and pulls the hand of the patient.
And another servant binds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; That shoulder comes back immediately, and if you see it like this, reset it in this manner:
and it is that you make a larger person be present; and he should be on the right side facing the shoulder of the patient, push his shoulder down under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in the air; and another servant pulls the hand of the patient down towards his stomach. And if the patient is too lightweight, he cannot hold anything heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
And it can also be reset in another way:
and it is that one sticks a long needle in the ground, so that the head should be as round as a pea, and not too thick nor too thin. Then let the patient lie down under [the practitioner], but with soft fabric beneath, and the patient should be long on the bed.
Extend the hand below, forming it in another way, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it does not return with all these things that we have said, do this treatment: Take a torch from the second arm that is four feet long and three inches wide, with the head round for movement to enter fully beneath the assele in this shape:
Then place the staff head on fabric soft beneath, so that the staff does not hurt the patient, then put it under the patient's assele.
Extend the arm over the long staff, place the shoulder on the staff, and hold the hand at the end of the arm, then extend the other hand below, and let the body hang from another side. The joint has come back now.
And when it is inside, no matter how, you must put a sphere of cotton equal in size under the anus, then place a plaster filled with powder from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk, all over the shoulder and around; then hold it down beneath the anus, turn the string around the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain in this position.
And it is necessary that he eat little, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal faster.
and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it. if it is closed and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another reason, you should administer fire cauterization at three places as stated in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened. And understand that the joint will never be set in its place.
Dislocations that are towards the hip and the buttocks, or behind, are made by impact and extension of hands, and another treatment is applied.
And heal until he is healthy.
And after the healing, if there is still pain in the limb and slow movement, the patient should use baths several times until the pain subsides and returns to its original state.
of the dislocation cost   (This line seems incomplete, as it does not seem to follow the pattern of translation from the previous lines.)
Know that the shoulder joint has been dislocated at points, and at points it returns.
And it has been dislocated in all parts, both front and back, and the dislocation is not put back in place, since it can be seen clearly and felt. It dislocates according to each shape. And when joining the broken bone with the healthy one, make sure it can be seen clearly. For the dislocated joint cannot bend the arm nor touch the shoulder at all.
You must reset it accordingly when an abscess arrives at the shoulder, because if an abscess comes to the shoulder, it would be difficult to reset.
And in case it cannot be completely returned from all sides, especially when it is at the back. It is worse than other dislocations and causes more pain, and in case there comes death.
And the restoration is, when it can be brought back to such a state, that you extend your hand to both hands; and the arms should be spread out, and the hands in line with the mirror on both sides, above and below, and push the joint back to its places together, or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it will return when you fold your hand over your other hand, and push against the bone joint that is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong traction;
and that two attendants extend the arm and pull it, and then one of them holds it still while the other pulls on it so that it does not move during traction.
Then turn the arm from each side, then when you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide around it;
And when the healer joins the joint to his hand, he pushes it away with some oil to soften the joint, then forces the joint back into place until it returns.
When it is in place, he puts some plaster dry with egg white on it and pulls it straight, then ties the arm around the patient's neck and leaves it for several days, then unties it.
And if the joint is held firmly in place, he unties the tie and leaves it be.
If you see that the joint does not hold well, repeat the plaster and the tie and leave it in that state for several days until it is firmly set. Then untie it.
And if it feels sore after the resetting of the joint and it stiffens, bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed. And place a sheep's bladder on the joint, then let it stay for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter into water. And when it bleeds, rub the joint gently, then place the bladder back on, and then enter into water again. And do this two or three times until it is healed.
And if you see, place a warm wet cloth with butter on it and hold it there.
It will return to its position.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and when it returns, it is easy, more than other joints. Immediately, it must be returned to its place quickly, during the very moment when it is dislocated, unless the joint is swollen or there is an abscess hot.
And the repositioning is that you place the affected hand on a table, extend the fingers, and align them, so that the palm is over the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns.
Then, you must look if it is in place; Then, the patient places the back of his hand on a table for extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's dorsal side of his hand on the table, and hold your hand over that appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, it is good. If not, strain it with plasters to calm the abscess and leave it so to start healing.
And if it cannot endure, and you cannot put it back in place after any days, then the dislocation remains twisted.
The patient must not exert the hand for as long as it is paralyzed, and cannot strain anything completely. Therefore know that nerves or arteries are cut.
There is no other remedy except to strain it by fire cautery in the case, and perhaps nothing else works.
And when the hand is at its place, put a splint on it as we have said, then bind and leave for 5 days, then unbind and leave in this manner.
If it cannot be moved well and there is no pain, moist with warm water and rub until it heals.
Of the dislocation of the fingers on the hand
The fingers are dislocated on both sides of the hand at times, or at the back of the palm or the belly.
Then place the fingers, and push the dislocation back towards your fingertips until it returns, then hold the finger's head, and bend it towards the part where it is disjoint.
And let him wait [the shoulder] for two days, and then make it even on that day;
And bind it up as we have said, and loosen it for a day, and make it move, and then bind it again.
and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated at the elbow of the arm, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
And do the same when it is dislocated from another part.
And for the dislocation of the small of the back
When the small of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are many such dislocations without a cure, death quickly approaches the patient.
And the signs are that the joints jump involuntarily, and they cannot be held, and many times a limb is softened, whether it is the two knees or the two arms or one.
And often the sciatic nerve becomes paralyzed at four parts;
that which becomes paralyzed in the back is called "gilbositez";
the treatment is that you should look to see if the gilbositez has come from childhood; if there is no cure or healing at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of cure used to say in great words, but it is not at all useful in every case.
but I have condensed it according to my intention and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gilbosite that comes before the worst case, there is no remedy or health;
And likewise the one that comes straight towards the two sides, cannot be cured by others except by him who comes from behind, as I said;
and the patient should be stretched out on his face in an even position, and there should be pressure underneath him so that he does not bleed.
then thrust the needle into the head of the shoulder in the earth and the other at the joints, and tie a rope under the patient's shoulders, and one around his thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
and two assistants know the ropes, one at the head and the others at the joints, between the two needles.
and let the needles be well closed as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine in form, until it recovers.
And if the dislocation does not return with this treatment, take a board three feet long and bend it so that its top is underneath, and have the patient lie on their side, and push the end of the board underneath the opening, then place the middle part of the board on the spine. And press the mirrors' feet on the other end of the board and hold firmly until it returns to its place.
If you see that it does not return, turn the patient to the opposite side. And you should insert two fingers of a hand's breadth into the head of the patient and between them leave a palm's space in length.
And each finger should be held still, or the patient should be turned as needed, and the fingers should be firmly pressed into the ground so they do not move.
And between each two sparks let there be a spark turning, as the links turn, and have in turning two small sparks of one span long, to turn the turning.
Then tie the link that is between the ankles to the upper turning and the other link towards the feet to the lower turning, and each of the servants turns his turning along the entire length, and the master puts the splint equal as we have said.
And when it is equalized, place a plaster with drying agent and egg on top of it, then bandage it, then place the cast from a tabletop of three feet long, which presses against the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a rope as we have said, and use the patient with subtle nursing until he is healed.
If anything comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the steam that we have said before. Sometimes they administer a wooden piece, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back of the spine, and it is thought to be dislocation. It is the bone that opens, which means there should be no presumption about it. By chance death may come.
Note that the junctions of the neck and shoulder do not come violently except for dislocation only, they do not break in the same way as other joints.
The junction of the neck is dislocated in four parts: Inside and out, front and back;
Also inside thereafter, but slightly less so outside in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when the sick leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and wider apart, and the sick person's thigh is less flexible than the healthy one, and they cannot bend their knee in fire. and it is the loosened joint that swells with abscess hot, because the hips of the thigh come there.
And the sign of that one who suffers from this condition is that this event happens contrary to what was mentioned before.
And the signs of him who has it in front are that his leg is well aligned according to the completion; However, it does not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make him walk, he cannot do so, and he holds his urine, and his ankle swells up, and when he walks, he limps on his heels.
And the signs of that one whose condition is at the back, are that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it double, and this leg is twisted more than the other, and the ankle becomes softened, and the head of the thighbone is beneath the ribs.
The re-alignments of this type of dislocation are such that you check if the dislocation is old and remains according to its position, without any treatment. it should not be assumed that there is treatment required.
And for the one in whom the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four types of dislocation, hasten that you turn the joint, push it inward and outward, and move it left and right; In case it returns, no further treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this manner, you must apply a strong force and push the leg firmly with two hands or to the thigh that is tied above the knee. And another minister extends his hand over in such a way that he pushes his hands beneath the buttocks, then binds it with a soft rope around the thigh. and another ties the head with the rope.
They stretch upward and downward all at once, so that the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains suspended.
This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If this does not happen, it is necessary to treat his condition.
When the dislocation is at the back, you must have the patient lie on his healthy side, then place the rope around the root of the thigh, and the affected area below the groin, then pull the rope towards the groin, and towards the shoulder.
Then take another assistant's hands, and embrace the large thigh of the ill leg, and stretch it out in a wide form. then return to its place now.
and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope above the heels and knees, and the ill leg should be extended two fingers more than others.
then it should be hung from a post by its head with its arms hanging long.
then command the assistant to embrace the thigh and another assistant should be hanging with the patient who embraces the thigh, because the joints are returning quickly now.
And when the dislocation is out of place, the patient lies down, as we have said in the one who has dislocated his shoulder; and stretches the ligament above the sick leg properly, and also above the pelvis.
then place two splinters, one at the head and another at the feet; then insert the splinter between the patient's knees in the shape. and have soaked cloths in warm water around it to prevent the patient from bleeding; then each attendant extends towards him, and the one who mirrors puts his hand equal to the dislocation.
If it returns [to its place], that's good.
If not, put it on a table and press as we have said in the gout, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg immediately, and as I have said. And set the mirrors his pain on top of the angry sickness, then press with the other hand and stretch it towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the outside, it should not be stretched downwards, nor raised up towards the ground, but rather as if the hip were dislocated to the outside, as we have said in the treatment of two hips. and it should be on its back, and the ligament stretched as we have said before, and must be pressed on the joint at the table. and when the patient stretches out his legs, they will be even. Then align the thighs and place the bolster, and tie it with a strap so that the hip does not move. And let it rest for three days or four, then dislocate it, and place the splint on top.
If you see they are even, hold them steady as before, and let it rest for three days.
Then dislocate it, and make it go gently, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation in the knee
The thighbone is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, from within and outward, and backward.
Do not dislocate it forward.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his chest, and put his foot on your feet.
Then take his thigh with your hands, pull it between your hands, then bend both sides of the thigh together. and another servant extends his foot until the thigh returns to its place, and the sign is that he bends his leg easily at the knee.
and apply the plaster, then bend the leg to the thigh, and keep them bound tightly for three or four days, then release it.
And do not let the patient walk, until the limbs are comfortable.
And if the limb is not straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of dislocation, until it is sound.
about the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
The sign is that the ankle is swollen, and it tends to move towards the part where it has been dislocated.
The reduction (of the dislocation) is easy, and it should be extended slightly when only stretched out.
And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright, and hold him by the leg, above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then raise it up and push the foot up hard;
and do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot;
if it goes back into place, that is good;
but if not, continue the work, for it will come back again;
and if it cannot go back in this way, lay the patient on his back on the ground, and drive the passael firmly into the ground between his legs, and tie cloths around so as not to hurt the patient;
Then, ministers stain the thigh, and another minister extends the foot to their hands or fingers, so that it lies across the neck of the foot. Then each minister extends evenly, and the clamps should be close together between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when they are stretched.
Then, the master equalizes the dislocation in his hands, and another minister stains the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, he puts the plaster and wool on top, and he forms it, ties the foot to the leg, and guards the nerves that are above the ankle, so the clamps are not too tight.
Leave it [the dislocation] for two or three days, and if it gets worse [i.e., the shoulder slips out again], hold it steady.
Release it [the dislocation] on the third or fourth day, and warn the patient to abstain from walking for four days. And if he goes before that term [of three to four days], it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess swells up, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
of the two [shoulders] When both shoulders are dislocated, they must be carefully stretched out without strain, and it is an easy thing to do.
If the dislocation is in any notch of the back or neck, you must have the patient sit on a flat surface [or table] straight, and place your foot on the opening of those joints, then press firmly on your foot until it returns.
When it is level and there is no opening, place a board under the foot of your foot, then hold it firmly, and let it stay for three days, then release it. And let him rest until he recovers.
Of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound occurs with dislocation and it is to be restored, often the patient dies.
Do not be presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and patient, do not be bold.
And at the beginning of treating an abscess, apply a warm cautery, and let the patient be in God's hands if you see no hope of health. And when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess grows cold.
And when the limb is in place, apply warm cautery to the abscess and treat the wound as necessary with dry ointments.
And if there is fracture with dislocation, and small bones are displaced, if you reset the bones, do as we have said in simple diseases;
And be careful not to enter into fear, according to what I have said, for it will increase according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your weapon and body.
